PLOS Pathogens’ COVID-19 response
July 14, 2020 PLOS Guest Blogger Covid-19 Editorial Global Health Open Access Pandemic Pathogens Vaccines
6

Michael Malim and Kasturi Haldar, Editors-in-Chief of PLOS Pathogens, share the journal’s plan to accelerate and amplify COVID-19 research.

Open and readily available research

This is a time of great challenges and great opportunities for scientists and clinicians working on COVID-19. PLOS Pathogens is committed to building and communicating a robust knowledge base for present and future research that will benefit patients and society.  We publish the latest discoveries in SARS-CoV-2 research, including reports of novel research, in depth Reviews, and shorter Pearls and Opinion pieces. As an Open Access journal, these articles and the underlying data are available to read and cite immediately. This is of paramount importance to ensure these advances can be read and built upon right from the start.

Expert and accelerated editorial oversight

We have entrusted a team of editors who are leading experts in the field, comprised of:

Michael Diamond, MD, PhD, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
Ron Fouchier, PhD, Erasmus University Medical Center
Benhur Lee, MD, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Andrew Pekosz, PhD, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Kanta Subbarao, MBBS, MPH, The Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity
David Wang, PhD, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
This team is committed to accelerating the time to both review and publication. We strive to make an initial editorial decision (reject or review) within three days of editor assignment.

PLOS Pathogens provides a perfect home for your SARS-CoV-2 research

PLOS Pathogens welcomes submissions on the full range of COVID-19 research, including: virology, structural biology, evolution, host interactions, immune responses, pathogenesis, co-morbidities, diagnostics, public health & infection control, vaccines, drug discovery, and clinical trials.

The PLOS-wide COVID-19 collection contains all published COVID-19 research from the full PLOS portfolio. PLOS Pathogens articles will be added to this page upon publication, so papers are accessible across all disciplines.
