https://coronavirus.medium.com/
The Coronavirus Pandemic is Amplifying America’s Racism


There’s a pandemic within a pandemic


Coronavirus Blog Team


Jun 1

The coronavirus pandemic continues to expose and amplify the racism ingrained into American life and the U.S. health care system. “Black people are being forced to swallow the twin sorrows of a deadly pandemic and our own murders being made public spectacle,” writes Tirhakah Love for LEVEL.
As Erika Stallings reports for Elemental, it’s become clear that the burden of Covid-19 infections is not felt equally. She reports:
According to CDC data on Covid-19 hospitalization during the month of March, 33% of hospitalized patients were black despite only being 18% of the surveyed population. And a recent preprint study from Yale School of Medicine found that blacks had a 3.57 times higher risk of dying from Covid-19 than whites. For Latinos, the risk was 1.88 times higher.
There are a variety of reasons why racial inequities lead to higher Covid-19 morbidity. “Medical and public health professionals around the country say misinformation about the disease in Black communities, together with the long-standing economic, environmental, and health inequities that affect them, are to blame for the trend,” writes Drew Costley for Elemental. He reports
It is also well documented that Black and Latinx people in the United States have disproportionately higher rates of health conditions like asthma, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes, which have been shown to result in more severe complications and higher rates of death from Covid-19. In many cases, these health conditions are linked to environmental stressors like air pollution, contaminated water, and food deserts, which disproportionately ravage Black and Latinx communities.
Blacks and Latinos are also more likely to be essential workers, which means they may be at a higher risk for exposure to the coronavirus. Stallings also reports that experts say much of the racial disparity being observed in Covid-19 infections and deaths can be traced to preexisting racial inequities related to so-called social determinants of health. “Level of educational attainment, neighborhood resources, employment status, and ability to earn a living wage are all social determinants of health in the United States,” explains Jessie Marshall, MD, an associate professor at the University of Michigan, adding that “racism is driving the racial disparities that we see.”
Public experts have stated over the weekend that stopping the pandemic will depend on the U.S.’s ability to take care of the most medically and socially vulnerable and that the risk of pandemic spread will continue while underlying problems — racism — remain unresolved.
To better understand the link between racism and Covid-19 outcomes, read the stories below.

Systemic Racism Is Killing Black People During the Pandemic
Coronavirus exacerbated already existing racial health disparities. Here’s what needs to be done.
elemental.medium.com


Coronavirus Is Wreaking Havoc on Black People Across the United States
Doctors and nurses from around the country are scrambling to protect vulnerable communities
elemental.medium.com


Coronavirus Forces Americans to Get a Taste of the Black Experience
Unemployment, poor health care, and physical restrictions are hurdles we’ve had to overcome for centuries
zora.medium.com


The Racism of Reopening the U.S. Too Soon
Communities of color stand to lose the most by this premature posturing
zora.medium.com


The Pandemic Has Exposed America’s Most Dangerous Virus
A nation finally says the quiet part out loud
gen.medium.com


The Unrelenting Anti-Blackness of 2020
As coronavirus and police brutality endanger Black bodies and minds, where do we find solace?
level.medium.com





Why People Won’t Change Their Minds on Covid-19


Our brains block out contradictory facts without us even realizing it, new research reveals


Robert Roy Britt


Jun 1 · 5 min read



Mass Protests, Russia’s New Treatment, and the Risk Posed by Your Boss


A roundup of stories we’re reading about Covid-19 today


Yasmin Tayag


Jun 1

* This weekend, enormous crowds gathered across the country to protest the murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer, stoking tensions with law enforcement — and concerns about a surge of Covid-19 cases. One medical historian who spoke to the New York Times points to the bond parades held in the midst of the U.S. influenza epidemic in 1918, many of which were followed by spikes in flu cases.
* Russia’s sovereign wealth fund, the RDIF, announced that the nation has an “effective treatment” against the coronavirus: a flu drug known as favipiravir. According to CNBC, favipiravir apparently shortened recovery time for Covid-19 patients in early trials, and Russia is planning to get the drug to hospitals this month. The drug was first developed under the name Avigan in Japan, but as Nikkei Asian Review notes, Japan’s government has not yet approved it as a coronavirus treatment.
* While the rest of the world was brought to heel by the coronavirus, Iceland didn’t even impose a lockdown. The isolated nation has essentially eliminated Covid-19, reports Elizabeth Kolbert in her fascinating account in the New Yorker, thanks to extremely aggressive quarantining and contact tracing. Meanwhile, an Icelandic biotech company called deCODE sequenced the virus from every Icelander who tested positive, allowing geneticists to map the spread of the disease.
* Flawed U.S. sick leave policies are exacerbating the dangers of Covid-19, writes Olga Khazan in The Atlantic. While many have been fortunate to have employers who are understanding about taking time off, that’s by far the exception to the rule. The U.S. law that makes it easier for workers to take paid leave if they get Covid-19 or have to take care of their kids doesn’t apply to large companies, and small companies can claim an exemption. Ultimately, the employees of those companies are at the mercy of their bosses when trying to mitigate their own Covid-19 risk.

Could the protests result in a second wave of Covid-19 infections? Protests following the murder of George Floyd by Minneapolis police continued through the weekend in cities throughout the United States. As the New York Times reports, some public health experts worry that the gatherings of thousands of people could quickly spread the coronavirus. Already over 100,000 Americans have died, and those deaths have been disproportionately Black Americans. While some experts told the Times that the closeness of crowds raises concern, Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University, offered some optimism:
The outdoor air dilutes the virus and reduces the infectious dose that might be out there, and if there are breezes blowing, that further dilutes the virus in the air. There was literally a lot of running around, which means they’re exhaling more profoundly, but also passing each other very quickly.
The crowds also tend to be mostly young people.
Protesters have said in interviews that while they realize there’s a risk for infection, racism in America has been around for much longer than the virus, and requires immediate attention and personal risk. As Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said on Face the Nation on Sunday, “Stopping the pandemic is going to depend on our ability to take care of our most medically and socially vulnerable. We absolutely need to resolve these underlying problems to eliminate the risk of pandemic spreading of the epidemic.”
Read more below.

How to more safely protest in a pandemic
As protesters take to the streets in dozens of US cities to mourn the death of George Floyd, resist police violence…
www.vox.com


Will Protests Spark a Second Viral Wave?
Across the country, mayors, public health experts and other officials worry that even though many protesters are…
www.nytimes.com


Ex-FDA chief Scott Gottlieb warns of uptick in coronavirus infections after widespread protests
Washington - Scott Gottlieb, former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, warned Sunday that the protests…
www.cbsnews.com


The Protests Will Spread the Coronavirus
The country should expect a spike in less than two weeks, public-health experts say
medium.com





‘Superspreaders’ Could Actually Make Covid-19 Easier to Control


The surprising implications of the disease’s tendency to spread in big bunches


Bloomberg Opinion


Jun 1 · 7 min read


A day in the life of a scientist running thousands of antibody tests. Jason Hord is one of several scientists working around the clock at the University of Washington’s virology lab—his shift is from 4 p.m. to midnight—to test samples from people around the United States for antibodies. Read the full story below.

This Scientist Is Running Thousands of Antibody Tests a Day
A day in the life of Jason Hord, one of many scientists working around the clock to test samples from people around the…
elemental.medium.com





A Psychologist Explains How Masks Transform Our Social Relationships


If it feels weirdly shameful to make eye contact in a mask, you’re not alone


Frank Faranda


Jun 1 · 4 min read









Systemic Racism Is Killing Black People During the Pandemic


Coronavirus exacerbated already existing racial health disparities. Here’s what needs to be done.


Erika Stallings


May 27 · 6 min read





Dispatch #9?—?Remember The Future


If one thing is predictable, it’s tomorrow.


Jordan L. Shlain MD


Jun 1 · 19 min read





The White House is Overruling Experts and Putting Churchgoers at Risk


Houses of worship are vital places we lean on for strength, we shouldn’t turn them into hotspots for coronavirus


Andy Slavitt


May 30 · 5 min read


Some new learnings about the coronavirus. There’s still much unknown about the virus that causes Covid-19, but as time goes on scientists are learning more and more. This recent New York Times article provides a helpful summary of some newer discoveries:
“…coronavirus patients are most infectious two to three days before symptoms begin, less so after the illness really hits.
Some people are generous transmitters of the coronavirus; others are stingy. So-called super-spreaders seem to be particularly gifted in transmitting it, although it’s unclear whether that’s because of their biology or their behavior.
On the receiving end, the shape of a person’s nostrils and the amount of nose hair and mucus present — as well as the distribution of certain cellular receptors in the airway that the virus needs to latch on to — can all influence how much virus it takes to become infected.
A higher dose is clearly worse, though, and that may explain why some young health care workers have fallen victim even though the virus usually targets older people.”
Read the full story below.

It's Not Whether You Were Exposed to the Virus. It's How Much.
The pathogen is proving a familiar adage: The dose makes the poison.
www.nytimes.com



Why Cutting Ties With the World Health Organization Is a Mistake


Trump says the U.S. is terminating its relationship with the UN organization. Here’s why that’s dangerous.


Alexandra Sifferlin


May 29

President Donald Trump said on Friday that the United States will end its relationship with the World Health Organization (WHO), an agency of the United Nations that deals with health and health crises.
It’s unclear exactly what this could mean. As Emily Rauhala of the Washington Post points out, the WHO constitution is a treaty that the U.S. ratified. At the very least it doesn’t seem like this move could happen quickly. Even so, a funding cut from the U.S. could be deeply felt by the organization.
The WHO is far from perfect and has been criticized in the past for bureaucracy that causes backlogs and a poor response to past pandemics like Ebola. While the United States may not need the WHO to respond to outbreaks stateside, many other countries do depend on the agency for medical assistance and supplies. Poor countries that do not have strong public health infrastructure lean on the agency to bolster their own responses to health crises.
Defunding the WHO — the U.S. currently funds 15% of the agency’s budget — is a dangerous mistake. As others have pointed out, containing a pandemic requires global cooperation and coordination. Poor countries need the WHO support, and the coronavirus will only stop being a threat when it’s spread can be brought under control everywhere. The organization is flawed. But cutting funding in the middle of a historic outbreak could hurt other nations and ultimately the U.S., too.

Health care spending during the pandemic has fallen dramatically.
Read more below.

How have healthcare utilization and spending changed so far during the coronavirus pandemic? …
In certain ways, healthcare utilization and spending are bound to increase during a pandemic. Indeed, the cost of a…
www.healthsystemtracker.org


Is Covid-19 actually a blood vessel disease? As Dana Smith reports for Elemental, there is a growing body of evidence to support the theory that the novel coronavirus can infect blood vessels, which could explain not only the high prevalence of blood clots, strokes, and heart attacks, but also provide an answer for the diverse set of head-to-toe symptoms that have emerged. Read the full story below.

Coronavirus May Be a Blood Vessel Disease, Which Explains Everything
Many of the infection’s bizarre symptoms have one thing in common
elemental.medium.com





Church and Coronavirus Is a Dangerous Combination


Data shows religious services are risky for Covid-19 spread. Yet places of worship are opening and the CDC is removing warnings


Alexandra Sifferlin


May 29

The debate around how to handle places of worship in the pandemic is becoming fraught. President Donald Trump recently said that churches are essential and that governors nationwide should allow them to reopen. The Supreme Court is set to decide on a religious freedom claim from a church in California. Churches, synagogues, and mosques in more than half of U.S. states are already allowed to open, though they remain under physical distancing rules.
Most recently, the White House and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) removed warnings for reopening houses of worship on the CDC website that said singing in choirs can spread the virus, the Washington Post reported on Thursday evening.
The Post reports that the CDC previously had recommendations for religious groups that said they should “consider suspending or at least decreasing use of choir/musical ensembles and congregant singing, chanting, or reciting during services or other programming, if appropriate within the faith tradition.” This was due to the fact that singing has been shown to spread Covid-19.
These recommendations were replaced by updated guidance that the Post says “no longer includes any reference to choirs or congregant singing and the risk for spreading virus. The altered guidance also deleted a reference to ‘shared cups’ among items, including hymnals and worship rugs, that should not be shared. The updated guidelines also added language that said the guidance ‘is not intended to infringe on rights protected by the First Amendment.’” (Read the full story here.)
The problem is that religious services and choirs have been cited as clusters of spread of the coronavirus, including in studies published by the CDC. A study published by the CDC on May 22 details how easily the coronavirus can spread in a church setting. The researchers looked at a cluster of cases from a rural Arkansas church. Among 92 people who attended the church, 35 people developed confirmed Covid-19 infections and three people died. An additional 26 cases linked to the church occurred in the surrounding community, and one person died.
Another study published by the CDC on May 15 outlines that following a two-and-a-half-hour-long choir practice in Washington with 61 people, 32 people were confirmed to have Covid-19 and 20 other cases were likely. Three of the people were hospitalized and two people died. “Transmission was likely facilitated by close proximity (within six feet) during practice and augmented by the act of singing,” the researchers concluded.
And yet another study published by the CDC in April that looked at a cluster of cases in Chicago concluded that it’s critical people avoid large gatherings. “These data illustrate the importance of social distancing for preventing SARS-CoV-2 transmission, even within families,” the authors wrote. “In this cluster, extended family gatherings (a birthday party, funeral, and church attendance)… might have facilitated transmission of SARS-CoV-2 beyond household contacts into the broader community.”
If faith-based organizations are reopening, the CDC has recommended that they work with local health officials for how to best implement the government guidelines to prevent Covid-19 transmission. The fact that those guidelines are continuing to change will surely make this job more difficult.


Coronavirus Infecting American Indians at Four Times the Rate of Rest of U.S.


A roundup of Covid-19 research we’re following


Drew Costley


May 29

* It’s worse for American Indians, too: Last week, I shared some recent research showing that Covid-19 is infecting and killing Black people in the United States at disproportionate rates with the rest of the population. Well, it turns out that it’s infecting people living on American Indian reservations at four times the rate of the U.S. population as a whole.
* New research set to come out in the July/August issue of the Journal of Public Health Management and Practice reveals the toll the virus is taking on American Indians. In their report, researchers from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) said lack of access to potable water and communication about critical public health information in indigenous languages were partially to blame for the impact the virus has had on Indian reservations.
* Domestic violence up in Los Angeles, Indianapolis: The number of domestic violence incidents are up in at least two American cities, Los Angeles and Indianapolis, according to research published in early May in the Journal of Criminal Justice. Researchers led by a team at UCLA examined calls for police service from early January to mid-April in the two cities and found an increase in the number of calls due to domestic violence. They predict that as shelter-in-place orders ease, the number of calls will decrease, but that they could rise again if another spike in Covid-19 infections causes more shelter-in-place orders.
* Coronavirus on the brain: A study of 725 hospitalized patients with Covid-19 by researchers in the United States and Italy may shed some light on how the virus affects the brain. Research published in Radiology last week showed that 59% of the patients studied reported an altered mental state and 31% experienced a stroke.
* The U.S. may get hit harder: Research out of the University of California, Berkeley and Kaiser Permanente published in The BMJ last week shows the United States may get hit harder than predicted by the Covid-19 pandemic. A study of 9.6 million people at Kaiser revealed that people hospitalized after being infected by Covid-19 stay in the hospital longer and are admitted to the intensive care unit at a higher rate than patients in China. Many of the predictions of disease burden from Covid-19 were based on early numbers in China, researchers say, and those predictions may not be sufficient for anticipating demand for Covid-related healthcare services in the United States
* Dementia doubles the risk: People who have a gene linked to dementia are at double the risk of developing severe Covid-19, according to research published on Tuesday in the Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences. Researchers from the United Kingdom and the United States analyzed data from the UK BioBank and found that people with the APOE e4e4 genotype had double risk of developing a severe form of the disease as people with the APOE e3e3 genotype.

Vietnam’s complicated success story. Vietnam’s response to the pandemic, OneZero reports, has been an underreported success: The communist country has logged 326 cases of Covid-19 and zero deaths, and experts say there is no evidence to suggest a systematic cover-up. Part of the country’s strategy uses technically and surveillance, which gets tricky. “A close look at Vietnam’s response reveals a resourceful — and often troubling — mix of high-tech and low-tech measures,” writes Georgina Quach. “They illustrate how mass data collection can be deployed to contain a disease — and how it can go wrong.”
Read the full story below.

Vietnam’s Coronavirus Death Toll Is Zero. The Cost? Total Surveillance.
The nation’s response to the pandemic reveals a resourceful — and often troubling — use of technology
onezero.medium.com


This is what it’s like to live in South Korea right now. The country has so far successfully handled the coronavirus pandemic and life is returning to “normal.” Here’s what day to day life is like, according to someone living there.
When I talk to my friends and family, I sometimes forget their situation. I’ll say, “So, I was at the gym… I was getting a massage yesterday… I was at work…” and they’ll stop me and say, “Wait, how long were you in quarantine?” And I have to clarify, “We were never quarantined. South Korea acted in time and did a really great job with testing and tracing, so things were well contained.”
Read the story below.

Life Feels Safe in South Korea Right Now
Living as an expat in Korea as they embrace a new normal while my family back in America continues to suffer from an…
elemental.medium.com


How Covid-19 will change our homes. Alyssa Giacobbe reports for GEN that a recent Gallup poll found that three in five workers who have been working from home during the pandemic would prefer to continue to work remotely as much as possible, even when the economy reopens. “If that’s the case, some things are going to have to change in the average American home: for instance, more flex rooms for offices or gyms, more outdoor space, and more storage for stocking up pantries and freezers,” she writes.
Read the full story below for what’s going to change.

Our Homes Are Going to Look Very Different Post-Pandemic
Get ready for ‘Zoom rooms’ and decontamination zones in entryways
gen.medium.com





How Did Japan Defy the Odds?


The country ended its state of emergency with few new cases and limited restrictions. Is there a takeaway for the U.S.?


Alexandra Sifferlin


May 28

Japan recently ended its state of emergency. According to data from Johns Hopkins, the country has 16,598 confirmed cases and 881 deaths. The number of daily new cases, according to World Health Organization data, peaked at 743 in April and has dropped to between 90 and 14 for the past week, Science reports.
“With this unique Japanese approach, we were able to control this [infection] trend in just 1.5 months; I think this has shown the power of the Japanese model,” said Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in a press conference.
How the country achieved this without a lockdown (the country doesn’t have the legal ability to implement one) and leaving many businesses open has experts somewhat flummoxed. “Just by looking at death numbers, you can say Japan was successful,” Mikihito Tanaka, a professor at Waseda University, told Bloomberg. “But even experts don’t know the reason.”
There’s a wide variety of suggested reasons for Japan’s success. They include the fact that the country has embraced widespread mask-wearing even before the outbreak, and that the population has a lower level of chronic diseases compared to other countries. It seems having other medical conditions can make Covid-19 infections more severe.
The start of the pandemic in Japan was rocky. People on the Diamond Princess cruise ship were quarantined on board for two weeks, and eventually over 700 people were infected and 14 people died. The decision to keep people on board for as long as the country did received widespread criticism.
Experts have different opinions about what contributed the most to the country’s successful response after that. In Bloomberg, authors argue that the country had a strong contact tracing effort in place that relied heavily on 50,000 public health nurses. The United States is currently hiring contact tracers, whereas Japan already had a system to deploy.
One strategy of Japan that’s mentioned frequently is the warning to residents to avoid the “three Cs” — closed spaces, crowds, and close-contact settings where people are talking face-to-face. As Science reports, Japan analyzed what clusters of cases had in common and determined that most of the spread was coming from places where people eat, sing, dance, and work out for extended periods, and that a lot of the spread was coming from people without symptoms or with mild ones. Residents were urged to reduce their contact with other people by 80%, and evidence suggests that advice was followed.
Even though the country’s state of emergency is over, restrictions remain on large events. Events with up to 100 people will be able to start soon and further openings will happen gradually.
Is there a takeaway for the United States? “I think as we move forward in the next phase of this pandemic it will be important to target our efforts at the most high-impact areas in terms of disease spread,” says Amesh A. Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, in an email. “Not every social interaction is going to be a major driver of spread; it will be important to be data-driven the way the Japanese were in heightening surveillance at specific locations where disease spread is more common.”
For the United States, Adalja says that could include jails, meatpacking plants, and other venues. “In general, you want to fight infectious diseases by using precision-directed tools, and it appears Japan was successful doing just that,” he says.
For a more detailed look at the country’s approach, I recommend the two stories below.

Did Japan Just Beat the Virus Without Lockdowns or Mass Testing?
By Lisa Du and Grace Huang
medium.com


Japan ends its COVID-19 state of emergency
s COVID-19 reporting is supported by the Pulitzer Center. Japan yesterday declared at least a temporary victory in its…
www.sciencemag.org


Pandemic insights from 14 of the world’s foremost long-term thinkers. Here’s a great piece from the Long Now Foundation which includes thoughts on how the pandemic is practice for climate change, the impact of the pandemic on kids’ ability to think long term, and the loss of truth.

Long-term Perspectives During a Pandemic
Insights from 14 of the world’s foremost long-term thinkers
medium.com





Why New York Suffered When Other Cities Were Spared by Covid-19


The mayor, the CDC and a New York disease expert weigh in


Bloomberg


May 28 · 8 min read





Covid-19 Is Hitting the Middle Aged Harder Than We Think


As we open up and go back to work, it’s possible we’ve missed something important?—?the danger to many 50–64 year olds


Andy Slavitt


May 28 · 5 min read



Multiple Crises in Minneapolis, Virtual Offices, and 3 Plans to Disinfect the World


A roundup of Covid-19 stories we’re reading today


Yasmin Tayag


May 28

* The murder of a black man named George Floyd at the hands of a white police officer in Minneapolis has sparked outrage and protests in the city. His killing occurred amid multiple crises already unfolding in the city, including the disproportionate treatment of black residents affected by the coronavirus. “It’s been horrible,” said Leslie Redmond, an attorney and the president of the Minneapolis chapter of the NAACP, in an interview with the New Yorker. “Black people were already in a state of emergency, and now we are constantly being denied access to health care. This is not new.”
* Many companies have moved their operations online during the pandemic, with some even planning to do so permanently. For a while, it seemed like the office was not long for this world, but as the Wall Street Journal reports, some companies that really, really miss watercooler chats have built virtual replicas of their offices online. These Sims-like reproductions allow employee avatars to mill about the kitchen and ask awkward questions about your kids as if the pandemic never happened.
* The planned re-opening of Florida’s Disney World in mid-July will no doubt bring much-needed cheer to cooped-up families — and cash to the state’s decimated tourist industry. But attendance will be limited, at least at first, the New York Times reports. If you manage to get in, you can expect to wear a mask, potentially see an NBA practice game, and be denied if you try to hug Mickey.
* The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently updated its guidance, stating that the coronavirus primarily spreads from close contact and less so via surfaces. But scientists are still trying to figure out how to Lysol-wipe the whole world just in case. In Wired, experts lay out three plans for de-germing the planet, which include applying microbe-killing coatings to handrails and doorknobs, regular viral swabs to detect germs, and installing disinfecting UV lights.




How Covid-19 Really Spreads


Infected surfaces, airborne plumes, AC systems, toilet flushes, and close proximity may all be involved


Robert Roy Britt


May 28 · 7 min read





Covid-19’s Other Sobering Statistics


A tale of American woe in 20 numbers


Robert Roy Britt


May 28 · 3 min read





Why Authorities Are Mad About Apple and Google’s New Coronavirus Feature


How two tech giants worked together to create a tool that can potentially help governments without violating our privacy


Thomas Smith


May 28 · 9 min read


Chelsea Clinton and Devi Sridhar write that the pandemic is causing unintended health consequences for children. People are neglecting vaccinations and causing progress in children’s health campaigns to erode.
We now worry that Covid-19 imperils the progress we’ve made on child survival by overwhelming countries’ health systems and diverting resources away from core health work. We both believe our respective governments and much of the world waited far too long to prepare for and react to Covid-19. Every country — including our own — needs to operate on two public health-driven landscapes simultaneously: responding to this crisis and pushing forward on other health priorities.
Read the full story below.

The Unintended Consequences of Covid-19 Put Kids at Risk
Chelsea Clinton and Devi Sridhar explain why we need to turn our attention to the most vulnerable among us
elemental.medium.com





How Dangerous Are Covid-19 Silent Spreaders?


A lot of people without symptoms are spreading the coronavirus, a new study suggests


Robert Roy Britt


May 27 · 4 min read





Masks Work.


A new perspective underscores the effectiveness of wearing a mask?—?even if you’re staying six feet apart


Alexandra Sifferlin


May 27

In a perspective published Wednesday in the journal Science, a group of scientists write that masks are not only helpful but necessary to combat the spread of the virus from people without symptoms.
Here’s the deal: Respiratory infections like Covid-19 are spread through droplets and aerosols that contain the virus that are expelled from people who have the illness. This can include while talking, coughing, sneezing, and yes, breathing.
A major issue with the current pandemic, the researchers point out, is a large proportion of Covid-19 cases are spreading from people who do not show or feel any symptoms of the virus (also referred to as people who are asymptomatic).
It’s much harder to control an outbreak that can spread so easily from people who do not feel sick. The researchers point out that people with Covid-19 can be highly contagious before any symptoms occur. Covid-19 has an incubation period of up to 14 days, with a median onset of symptoms of around five days. An example they cite is the spread in Wuhan, China, where it’s estimated that people who were asymptomatic could be responsible for up to 79% of infections.
This is why testing is so important, and why mask wearing is also important.
Here’s some more bad news, from the authors: “Increasing evidence for SARS-CoV-2 suggests the [six feet] WHO recommendation is likely not enough under many indoor conditions where aerosols can remain airborne for hours, accumulate over time, and follow air flows over distances further than [six feet].”
Even outdoors, they write “breezes and winds often occur and can transport infectious droplets and aerosols long distances.” People without symptoms who are highly contagious and are speaking and exercising could still release infectious droplets that can be picked up. However, it’s important to note there is very little data on Covid-19 transmission outdoors.
The authors say it’s important to wear well-fitted masks indoors even if you’re six feet away from another person. We can look to other countries to support this. Places like Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and South Korea have been highly effective at reducing Covid-19 spread and they’ve required everyone to wear masks.
“For society to resume, measures designed to reduce aerosol transmission must be implemented, including universal masking and regular, widespread testing to identify and isolate infected asymptomatic individuals,” the authors write.
Read the full perspective below.

Reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2
Masks and testing are necessary to combat asymptomatic spread in aerosols and droplets Respiratory infections occur…
science.sciencemag.org

And here are some tips for effective mask-wearing.

The Right Way to Wear a Mask and Gloves
Personal protective equipment is only as effective as the person wearing it. Here’s how to avoid cross-contamination.
elemental.medium.com





A Doctor’s Plea: We Are Reopening Too Soon


On lifting restrictions while still in the trenches


JT Nakagawa


May 27 · 7 min read



France’s Hydroxychloroquine Ban, an ‘Avalanche’ of Evictions, and a Dispatch From the Beach


A roundup of Covid-19 stories we’re reading today


Yasmin Tayag


May 27

* On May 22, a large study published in the medical journal The Lancet raised red flags about hydroxychloroquine, the once-promising but controversial drug that President Donald Trump took as a prophylactic for Covid-19 and touted as a “game-changer.” Taking the drug, it suggested, increased the risk of heart problems and death. The World Health Organization has stopped its study of hydroxychloroquine, and now, as Politico reports, France has banned its use for coronavirus treatment entirely.
* New data from the U.S. Census Bureau illustrates the devastating impact of the coronavirus pandemic on mental health. As the Washington Post reports, one-third of Americans are showing signs of clinical anxiety or depression, noting, “It’s not normal for this many Americans to feel depressed.” The proportion is even higher in Southern states, which were hit particularly hard by Covid-19: Nearly half of Mississippians and 43% of Louisianans showed symptoms, compared to 26% in Iowa.
* Low-income tenants are the hardest hit among the millions left unemployed by the pandemic, writes the New York Times, because their rent eats up what’s left of their paychecks and savings. As government relief payments and legal protections for these people run out, says one housing expert, the United States can expect an “avalanche of evictions” unless the government intervenes again.
* Attendance at U.S. beaches over the long weekend painted a confusing summer scene: Some, like Daytona Beach, were overrun by thousands of revelers. Others, like Coney Island, left plenty of space for socially distant sunbathing. In The Atlantic, Russell Berman describes a “hodgepodge” of beach rules being enforced across the United States: “In Los Angeles, beachgoers could swim, but not sunbathe, on Memorial Day In New York City, they could sunbathe, but not swim.” The inconsistency is taking its toll on beach vendors, whose businesses are suffering as confused Americans continue to avoid the shore.




We Don’t Know What’s Behind the COVID-19 Racial Disparity. And That’s a Problem.


Outrage is warranted. But outrage unaccompanied by analysis is a danger in itself.


The Atlantic


May 27 · 5 min read





Do We Finally Have a Treatment for Covid-19 That Saves Lives?


An expert in hospital medicine weighs in


Bo Stapler, MD


May 26 · 3 min read





We Haven’t Properly Mourned the 100,000 Lives Taken by Covid-19


Americans would take the Coronavirus more seriously if they saw the true impact of the disease on those who suffer most


Andy Slavitt


May 27 · 4 min read


Yes, you develop some immunity to Covid-19. There are a lot of questions around immunity, specifically how long it lasts. But let’s make one thing clear: Scientists agree that people develop immunity to the coronavirus. For how long is unknown.
Read on for the full story.

Yes, You Develop Some Immunity to Covid-19. The Question Is, How Much?
Experts say it would be ‘extremely bizarre’ if people didn’t develop some immunity to Covid-19
elemental.medium.com





CRISPR Could Allow for Fast, At-Home Coronavirus Testing


They could be as simple to use as a pregnancy test?—?but they’re not there yet


Emily Mullin


May 27 · 5 min read


When will it be safe to go back to the gym? Writer Christie Aschwanden explores that question for Elemental. Consider gym-going in context, says one expert: “There are so many other ways to maintain your fitness. You have to ask yourself: What problem are you trying to solve by going to the gym?” If you do go to a gym, keep this in mind:
Ask the gym about their procedures, and bring disinfectant wipes with you to thoroughly wipe down any surface before and after you touch it. Finally, don’t linger.
Read the full story below.

Will It Ever Be Safe to Go Back to the Gym?
As some fitness centers reopen, public health experts cringe
elemental.medium.com





Why the Stock Market Keeps Going Up While Employment Nosedives


It turns out only one of these is a leading indicator of the economy


Nick Maggiulli


May 27 · 6 min read


What the best books on plagues and pandemics show us about what might come after the pandemic. “Unlike the Black Death, which killed tens of millions and often decimated a quarter or even half of the populations of the cities it visited, the Covid-19 crisis is unlikely to immediately and radically reconfigure entrenched power balances. But the extreme stresses it places on our societies will open up spaces for transformation nonetheless. Such as, perhaps, rendering equality more feasible.”
Read the full story below.

We Already Have a Blueprint for What Comes Next
From the Bible to ‘Epidemics and Society’ to ‘The Age of Surveillance Capitalism,’ these works map out our…
onezero.medium.com


Don’t forget the paramedics. One emergency health worker shares his fears that paramedics will be forgotten.
“Months into a pandemic that may last years, there is still no guarantee that protective gear supply chains will be restored and maintained. In addition to the crushing call volumes and staggering mortality they are facing, E.M.S. workers have to endure the mental trauma of wondering if they are safe, if their families are safe and what will become of them if they are unable to work.”
Read the full story below.

Opinion | Don't Forget the Paramedics
After 9/11, New York left us behind. I fear the same will happen with the coronavirus. By Mr. Gardner has been a…
www.nytimes.com





Social Distancing Is Still Important Even as Cities Reopen


Just because society is reopening doesn’t mean it’s safe to hang out at parties


Yasmin Tayag


May 26

Over the long weekend, revelers from Daytona Beach to Houston flouted social distancing guidelines with raucous celebrations and crowded pool parties. Technically, they weren’t breaking any rules: Stay-at-home orders in Florida and Texas have expired, and all U.S. states and territories have eased their shutdowns to varying degrees to jump-start their suffering economies. Social distancing, once a rule, is now considered guidance.
But just because it isn’t illegal to get together now doesn’t mean that social distancing isn’t still critical for keeping you and your loved ones safe. The coronavirus hasn’t been eliminated from the United States — far from it — which means that there are still people getting infected, potentially walking around and infecting people around them. You’re still at risk of becoming infected if you come into contact with someone who has tested positive. And if you are infected but asymptomatic, you risk spreading the virus to people you interact with. Going to public places, especially crowded ones where you get within six feet of another person, increases that risk.
Perhaps the reopening of places like businesses, beaches, and churches sent out a confusing signal suggesting it’s safe to resume regular life. After all, why would officials allow cities to reopen if it wasn’t safe to do so?
But risk is not black and white: It exists on a spectrum, and the officials who have sanctioned reopening have deemed the risk of Covid-19 spread to be low enough that people can hang out in public again. It’s also worth noting that some of these decisions are made based on hospital capacity. It’s not that spread risk is low, but hospitals have reached a place where they might be able to handle the number of infections. It’s bleak but true. Unsurprisingly, public health experts have strongly contested the interpretation that it’s safe to reopen, arguing that the risk of catching and spreading the disease remains too high to do so safely. Here’s a helpful rule of thumb if you ever need clarity: As long as the coronavirus is still circulating in the population, your risk of infection can never be zero.
The idea that certain cities have “flattened the curve” may have contributed to misunderstandings about relative safety. It’s true that some cities, like San Francisco, have flattened their curve. This means that the number of new Covid-19 cases there is no longer rising exponentially day to day. What it doesn’t mean is that the number of new Covid-19 cases has necessarily dropped down to zero. The virus is still infecting people in many places that have flattened the curve — it’s just doing so at a more gradual rate, hence the flat line on the graph. It means the number of people infected has become more manageable for health care systems. The hope is that eventually, the case count will reach zero, but most places are simply not there yet.
Committing to social distancing will help us achieve that. But since it’s no longer enforceable by law, it will take cooperation — and a certain level of personal sacrifice. As the Washington Post reported, law enforcement officials in the cities that hosted big Memorial Day weekend parties said they couldn’t enforce social distancing because it’s now a guideline, not a mandate. Those parties increased the risk of exposure to everyone who attended, though we won’t know how many people were actually infected for another two weeks, since the virus’s incubation period ranges from two to 14 days. In that time, anyone who was infected could spread the virus elsewhere. For a look at what could happen if we relax social distancing rules too early, just take a look at what’s happening in Brazil, where cases are climbing and hospitals are nearing peak capacity.
We all desperately want to see our family and friends and hang out at restaurants and parties and bars — but to ensure we can all do so sooner rather than later, we must cooperate to bring the number of new cases down to zero. And that means avoiding chances to catch and spread the disease, no matter the official rules in your area.
In its guidance for reopening the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states: “Reopening America requires all of us to move forward together by practicing social distancing and other daily habits to reduce our risk of exposure to the virus that causes Covid-19.” The key term here is “work together” — which means forgoing parties now so that we can all attend them in the future.


Rowdy Beach Parties, a Vaccine Volunteer, and an Eid Celebration in Animal Crossing


A roundup of stories we’re reading about Covid-19 today


Yasmin Tayag


May 26

* “It looks like there are two people out the sunroof throwing money,” said the pilot of a police helicopter as he flew over Daytona Beach, Florida this weekend, one of many places where rowdy Memorial Day weekend parties illustrated a new dilemma. In areas where executive orders related to the coronavirus have expired, reports the Washington Post, law enforcement officials say they can’t really enforce social distancing guidelines, no matter how important they remain.
* At the end of March, a Seattle resident named Ian Haydon announced he was volunteering to get Moderna’s experimental coronavirus vaccine, even though the risks were high. Now, STAT News reports that Haydon had an adverse reaction to the vaccine that involved a high fever and fainting. While he was at first reluctant to speak about his reaction out of fear it would stoke general antagonism around vaccines, he decided to do it, he says, to caution those who are clamoring to rush a vaccine to market.
* China “has been using practically every surveillance system in its toolbox since at least February,” writes my colleague Dave Gershgorn in his roundup of coronavirus surveillance programs around the world. Apps and maps powered by facial recognition, location tracking, and drones have been instrumental in helping the country manage its Covid-19 epidemic, raising urgent privacy concerns. Now, the Wall Street Journal reports, there are plans to create a permanent version of a smartphone-based health tracking app in at least one Chinese city.
* This weekend was Eid, the feast that marks the end of the monthlong fasting of Ramadan. Under normal circumstances, many people would break their fast with friends and family, but coronavirus restrictions have inspired alternative platforms for celebration — including, as Vice reports, an Eid celebration held on a virtual island in the Nintendo Switch game Animal Crossing.

The sometimes-ugly history of plasma therapy. Plasma from people who have recovered from Covid-19 is currently being tested as a promising treatment for people with severe coronavirus infections. As Douglas Starr— author of Blood: An Epic History of Medicine and Commerce—reports for Elemental, plasma therapy has a long, and controversial, history in the United States. It’s both saved lives, and harmed people. Read the full story below.

A Promising Coronavirus Treatment Has a Dark History
Through war and the AIDS crisis, plasma has helped and hurt the people who need it
elemental.medium.com





The State of the Union on Covid-19


The virus is moving South and Midwest in the US, “super-spreader” data is favorable to containment, and disease spread in South America is…


Andy Slavitt


May 26 · 5 min read


Our brains are adapting to pandemic stress — and we’re starting to slip up. When’s the last time you washed all of your groceries and carefully scrubbed the outside of your packages? Maybe you’re still very vigilant, but others are reporting that it’s getting harder to sustain the same high level of diligence that characterized the beginning of the pandemic. What’s the reason? It’s quarantine fatigue, and your brain is beginning to adapt to Covid-19 stress.
Read more about it below.

Starting to Slip Up? Your Brain Is Entering Quarantine Fatigue.
Have you stopped disinfecting your groceries? You’re not alone. Constant coronavirus vigilance is taking a toll.
elemental.medium.com


How to get a coronavirus vaccine to millions of people. Developing a successful vaccine is step one, but making sure everyone has access is another major undertaking. As Emily Mullin reports for OneZero, if or when a vaccine becomes available, governments will need to prioritize who gets it.
A huge number of people will need to receive a vaccine in order to stop the spread of the coronavirus and establish herd immunity — the point at which most of the population is protected against an infectious disease. To achieve herd immunity against Covid-19, anywhere from 50% to 90% of the population may need to be immune. And, since no vaccine is 100% effective, the more people who are vaccinated, the better. Getting a vaccine to all the people who need one will take a massive effort, both in the United States and around the world. There has never been a global immunization campaign on the scale that will be needed to distribute a Covid-19 vaccine.
Read the story below for how this can be accomplished.

Developing a Vaccine Is Only the First Step
Manufacturing and distributing it will pose significant challenges
onezero.medium.com


The pandemic is fast-forwarding the economy into the future. In an insightful piece for Marker, writer Steve Levine argues that “from surveillance to e-commerce, the pandemic is accelerating some trends while calling bluff on others.”
Read the story below.

Our Economy Was Just Blasted Years Into the Future
The crisis is compressing and accelerating trends that would have taken decades to play out
marker.medium.com





Obama’s Surgeon General Says Coronavirus Could Cure the Loneliness Epidemic


Healthy relationships are as essential as vaccines and ventilators for our global recovery


Dr. Vivek Murthy


May 26 · 4 min read





Gray Hair, Unmanicured Nails, the Quarantine 15?—?Who Cares?


As my beauty routine wanes, I’m working on silencing my inner critic


Babette Dunkelgrün


May 26 · 6 min read





Miss Jessie’s Founder Says Beauty Will Never Be the Same


The beauty industry is changing during the pandemic but Branch thinks that’s a good thing


Jolie A. Doggett


May 26 · 6 min read





Grappling With a Terrible Milestone: One Hundred Thousand Dead


To mourn in a moment of collective trauma is to experience not one but multiple layers of loss


The Atlantic


May 25 · 6 min read





Did Japan Just Beat the Virus Without Lockdowns or Mass Testing?


By Lisa Du and Grace Huang


Bloomberg


May 25 · 7 min read



Is It Safe to be Around Someone Who Had Covid-19?


Here’s what the experts say


Coronavirus Blog Team


May 25

Questions remain regarding whether getting Covid-19 definitely means you have enough antibodies to be immune to getting the virus again. However, experts say that it’s likely there’s at least some immunity produced.
“There’s a good reason to believe that after one has been infected with this virus, that there is a degree of immunity that lasts for some period of time, possibly up to a year,” says Amesh A. Adalja, MD, a senior scholar at Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “So in general, I don’t think it’s very risky to hang around with somebody who has recovered from the infection.”
Even so, it’s important to keep in mind that unknowns about the virus remain, so physical distancing is still recommended.
“SARS-CoV-2—the virus that causes Covid-19—can be shed for some time, so the first consideration would be to understand whether that person might still be contagious; this can be determined by their health care provider,” says Robin Patel, MD, the president of the American Society for Microbiology.
“If someone was infected in the remote past, this is a different situation,” she says. “Unfortunately, we do not know for sure whether there is protective immunity to [the virus], meaning that we don’t know with certainty whether an individual can become reinfected. For that reason, at this point, it would be best to consider that person as you’d consider someone who hadn’t already had Covid-19.” Meaning, stay six feet apart.


6 Coronavirus-Adjacent Stories We’re Reading


Zoom burnout, blue light skin care, and a flour company that’s thriving


Coronavirus Blog Team


May 24

The pandemic has infiltrated nearly every aspect of people’s daily lives. While these stories may not shed light on the coronavirus, they are helpful, compelling, and even fun reads about our new normal.

Inside the Flour Company Supplying America’s Sudden Baking Obsession
How King Arthur Flour found itself in the unlikely crosshairs of a pandemic
marker.medium.com


You Are Not ‘Working From Home’
You’re at home, during a crisis, trying to work
forge.medium.com


The Gaslighting of America Has Begun
Understand your power, my friends. Business and government do.
forge.medium.com


Blue Light Skin Care Is Probably a Scam
In this extremely digital time, pricey blue light skin care products promise to protect against ‘digital aging’
elemental.medium.com


Zoom Burnout Is Real
And here’s what to do about it
onezero.medium.com


Why People Buy Luxurious Things in the Middle of a Financial Crisis
How ‘shoptimism’ drives consumers even when it’s irrational
marker.medium.com


A somber tribute.

She’s a scam expert. Pandemic scams are out of control. Jean Marie, host of the popular podcast The Dream, shares how scammers are profiting off people’s fear of Covid-19. Read the story below.

Scammers Are Out of Control Right Now
As host of ‘The Dream’ podcast, reporting on scammers is my job. The pandemic is making fraud way too easy.
elemental.medium.com


A shameful divide. Data is increasingly showing disparities in Covid-19 outcomes. A recent New York Times story found that nursing homes with a significant number of black and Latino residents have been twice as likely to be hit by the coronavirus compared to those where the population is overwhelmingly white.

The Striking Racial Divide in How Covid-19 Has Hit Nursing Homes
Homes with a significant number of black and Latino residents have been twice as likely to be hit by the coronavirus as…
www.nytimes.com



What’s the Deal With Coronavirus and Surface Spread?


Updated guidance from the CDC provides new details about the virus’s transmission patterns


Yasmin Tayag


May 22

Uncertainty about Covid-19’s ability to spread through surfaces can make it seem like no surface is ever clean enough. Maybe you’ve found yourself in the absurd situation of wiping down a box of Cheerios, or disinfecting bicycle handles until the rubber starts to flake. Such efforts are understandable — in the face of uncertainty, better to be safe than sorry.
But now, updated guidance from the U.S. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention states that the virus “does not spread easily” from touching surfaces or objects. The recent update to its “How Covid-19 Spreads” website emphasizes that person-to-person contact remains the primary way that the disease spreads. Previous research has established that the virus is largely spread through respiratory droplets produced when we talk, cough, and sneeze. When others breathe in those droplets, they can become infected.
Previous research has shown that traces of the virus can be detected on surfaces, as was the case on the Diamond Princess and Grand Princess cruise ships, where viral RNA remained on surfaces for up to 17 days. But crucially, that research did not show that the viral particles found on the surfaces can cause infection.
While transmission via surfaces is not ruled out entirely, the CDC guidance says that touching surfaces or objects “is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.” It notes further that it “may be possible that a person can get Covid-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes.”
Relatedly, it also states that the risk of Covid-19 spreading from animals to people is “considered to be low,” though it acknowledges that the virus can spread from people to animals.”
While cleanliness and good hygiene remain paramount, the CDC says human contact is how Covid-19 spreads “very easily and sustainably between people,” so social distancing, as always, remains the ultimate tool to keep you and your loved ones safe.




Making Sense of the Latest Coronavirus Vaccine News


A status update on 5 vaccines under investigation


Emily Mullin


May 22 · 4 min read



Covid-19 Is Pummeling Black Americans, and Parents Are Not Alright: 5 Important New Findings


A roundup of the coronavirus research we’re following


Drew Costley


May 22

* Black people get it worse: In April, I reported in Elemental that the coronavirus was disproportionately killing Black people in the United States. Less than two months later, the toll of Covid-19 on Black Americans is much worse. In New York City, previously the epicenter of the nation’s pandemic, Black people are five times as likely to develop Covid-19, according to a preprint published in early May in medRxiv. Researchers found that areas of the city with large Black populations were at “markedly higher risk” of contracting the disease — for reasons not completely explained by the environment or preexisting conditions. A different set of data showed that the death rate for Black people with Covid-19 in New York City is three times that of White residents. Research released on Wednesday by APM Research Lab, a nonpartisan research group, also looked at data from Washington, D.C., and 40 states, finding that the death rate for Black people nationwide is 2.4 times that for White people and 2.2 times that for Latinx and Asian people. In some states, Black people are dying from the virus at up to seven times the rate of White people.
* Critically ill: A look at 257 people who tested positive for Covid-19 then became critically ill and were hospitalized, published in The Lancet on Tuesday, is the largest prospective study of adult U.S. coronavirus patients yet. Researchers found that nearly 40% of the people with Covid-19 died of the disease and 79% of them required use of a ventilator.
* The parents are not alright: The coronavirus is stressing American parents out, according to a survey of over 3,000 U.S. parents conducted by the American Psychological Association and published Thursday. On average, parents of children under the age of 18 reported a stress level of 6.9 out of 10, while people without children reported a 5.5 out of 10. Of the parents surveyed, 46% said their stress level was high (between eight and 10), whereas only 28% of people without children said the same.
* Over 2 billion at risk: More than 2 billion people in low- and middle-income countries are at higher risk of contracting Covid-19 than people in wealthy countries because they lack access to soap and clean water, according to research published last week in Environmental Health Perspectives. Over half the people in sub-Saharan Africa and Oceania don’t have access to the type of handwashing proven to help mitigate the spread of the disease.

The first successful vaccine against the coronavirus may well fail the people who need it most — 50 million people over 65, writes Brendan Borrell for OneZero.
“Vaccines, including Moderna’s, are generally designed to get out of the gate with the young and healthy in mind and only later are dialed-in for more vulnerable groups. The ambitious vaccine rollout timetable touted by the president likely represents the starting line, not the finish line, when it comes to the immunity of older adults.
“I don’t think life is ever going to be going back to the way it was,” says Janet McElhaney, a medical doctor and vaccine expert at Health Sciences North in Ontario, Canada, who is now herself in her midsixties. As we age, our bodies lose the ability to respond to new threats and to recognize ones we’ve previously been exposed to, which means that older adults don’t develop a vigorous defense following vaccinations.”
Read the full story below.

The Coronavirus Vaccine May Not Work on the Elderly
For those over 65, the pandemic is unlikely to end when the first vaccines arrive
onezero.medium.com





Ecstatic and Terrified, Americans Are Rushing Out of Their Homes


A vast national experiment begins in the face of the pandemic


Bloomberg


May 22 · 6 min read





Brazil’s Covid-19 Crisis Shows What Will Happen if the U.S. Relaxes All Social Distancing Standards


President Jair Bolsonaro is exasperating the Trump playbook


Andy Slavitt


May 22 · 4 min read





Social Distancing Is Not Enough


We will need a comprehensive strategy to reduce the sort of interactions that can lead to more infections


The Atlantic


May 22 · 11 min read


How to safely rent a house this summer. In a new story for Elemental, experts say renting a vacation spot is possible, with precautions.
Eleanor Murray, ScD, assistant professor of epidemiology at Boston University’s School of Public Health, agrees that a rental house can be a good way to take a vacation in the next few months. Unlike hotels where you will naturally come into contact with more people (cleaning staff, other guests, and so on), she says staying in a place where it’s just you and your chosen unit could be safer. “When you get there you can make sure everything is sanitized to a level that you’re comfortable with, and then it would be just like your house,” she says.
Read the full story below.

Your Very Detailed Guide to Safely Staying in a Rental House
What to know, what to disinfect, and whether it’s ok to swim in the pool
elemental.medium.com





What’s Safer, a Grocery Store or a Farmer’s Market?


Here’s what the experts say


Alexandra Sifferlin


May 22

Grocery shopping is an essential task, but it’s not always the easiest to navigate. There are ways to keep the shopping safe by staying distanced from other customers and wearing masks, but if you have an option to go to an outdoor market, should you take it?
“A farmer’s market might generally be a little safer than a grocery store if it is outside,” says Robin Patel, MD, the president of the American Society for Microbiology. “You would of course need to take into account the level of crowdedness as well as measures that either the grocery store or farmer’s market have in place for physical distancing.”
If it is possible to comfortably keep an adequate distance from other shoppers and both settings are equally crowded, then Patel says the outdoor option of a farmer’s market might be safer because it’s an outdoor space with more fresh air. “Masks should be worn in both situations and shoppers should stay at least six feet away from others,” says Patel. “Another option would be to pre-order from either the grocery store or farmer’s market and pick up your goods without spending a lot of time there.”

The public is being misled about pandemic technology. In an op-ed for OneZero, Evan Selinger, a professor of philosophy at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Brenda Leong, senior counsel and director of A.I. and ethics at the Future of Privacy Forum write that technology like thermal imaging is “little more than security theater.”
As the duo argues, thermal cameras have many fatal limitations when used to screen for the coronavirus:
* They are not intended for medical purposes.
* Their accuracy can be reduced by their distance from the people being inspected.
* They are “an imprecise method for scanning crowds” now put into a context where precision is critical.
* They will create false positives, leaving people stigmatized, harassed, unfairly quarantined, and denied rightful opportunities to work, travel, shop, or seek medical help.
* They will create false negatives, which, perhaps most significantly for public health purposes, “could miss many of the up to one-quarter or more people infected with the virus who do not exhibit symptoms,” as the New York Times recently put it. Thus they will abjectly fail at the core task of slowing or preventing the further spread of the virus.
Read the full story below.

The Public Is Being Misled by Pandemic Technology That Won’t Keep Them Safe
Technology like thermal imaging is little more than security theater
onezero.medium.com





Medium Rare: Our Favorite Stories About Finding New Ways to Pass the Time


Writers in the Medium universe are getting creative under quarantine


Amanda Sakuma


May 22 · 3 min read





Navigating Covid-19 Through the Power of Perspective


How can changing our perspective help us to be Passion Struck in our life and our career?


John Miles


May 21 · 6 min read


Nobel laureates blast the National Institutes of Health’s decision to cancel a grant to study bat coronaviruses in China. Seventy-seven U.S. scientists who have won the Nobel Prize have asked Francis Collins, the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and Alex Azar, the secretary of Health and Human Services, to review an NIH decision to cancel the grant, Science reports.
In the letter, the scientists write: “We believe that this action sets a dangerous precedent by interfering in the conduct of science and jeopardizes public trust in the process of awarding federal funds for research… Now is precisely the time when we need to support this kind of research if we aim to control the pandemic and prevent subsequent ones.”
Read more below.

'Preposterous.' 77 Nobel laureates blast NIH decision to cancel coronavirus grant, demand…
Seventy-seven U.S. scientists who have won the Nobel Prize today asked Francis Collins, the director of the National…
www.sciencemag.org


NIH's axing of bat coronavirus grant a 'horrible precedent' and might break rules, critics say
s COVID-19 reporting is supported by the Pulitzer Center. The research community is reacting with alarm and anger to…
www.sciencemag.org





Learning to Live in the Valley of Uncertainty


For many critical coronavirus questions, we simply do not have clear answers


New York Magazine


May 21 · 11 min read





A Word of Caution Before Returning to the Gym


Researchers in South Korea traced over 100 positive coronavirus cases to an exercise class


Yasmin Tayag


May 21

A preponderance of online yoga classes, at-home workouts, and concerns about the “Quarantine 15” (seriously, do not worry about weight right now) suggest that the pandemic has not dampened the public’s interest in exercise. Now, the nation’s reopening may make it tempting to make a beeline for the gym, but new research from South Korea might make you think twice about heading toward a sweaty, enclosed space with a bunch of your workout buds.
The research letter, recently published in the CDC journal Emerging Infectious Diseases, details a network of over 100 cases traced back to a single nation-wide, Latin-music-themed, fitness dance workshop held on February 15 in the city of Cheonan. This was no ordinary exercise class: It was a four-hour, high-intensity workshop for 27 dance instructors, meaning that attendees later traveled back to their respective gyms to their own networks of students.
Then 10 days after the workshop, public officials identified a person who tested positive in Cheonan and quickly began to trace related cases. Everyone in that person’s network who tested positive had participated in a fitness dance class, and further tracing pointed toward the workshop as the origin of the outbreak. By March, the researchers had identified 112 positive cases associated with dance classes in 12 different Cheonan sports facilities. They learned that of the 27 instructors who went to the workshop, eight later tested positive, but all of them were asymptomatic the day they attended.
The study, led by Sukbin Jang of Dankook University Hospital, highlights how efficiently the virus can spread in a workout environment. Dance instructors and students only ever met during 50-minute classes, twice a week, yet transmission between them made up over half of the cases. A smaller proportion of cases were attributed to family-related transmission and to transmission between co-workers and acquaintances.
The authors of the study point toward “large class sizes, small spaces, and intensity of the workouts” as reasons for relatively high transmission between instructors and students. They also note that the “moist, warm atmosphere in a sports facility coupled with turbulent air flow generated by intense physical exercise can cause more dense transmission of isolated droplets.” In other words, heavy workouts in close quarters could create a perfect storm for the virus to spread.
We know that the coronavirus is largely spread through tiny droplets we exhale when talking (loudly), coughing, sneezing, or even singing, so it seems reasonable that a situation in which we’d be exhaling a lot — like a high-intensity Latin-music-themed exercise dance class — would create a greater risk of transmission, especially if that place is enclosed. Ventilation, some research suggests, goes a long way in preventing spread.
One interesting discovery was that a yoga and Pilates instructor who worked in the same facility as a dance instructor who went to the workshop did not appear to transmit the virus to her small classes of seven or eight students. “We hypothesize that the lower intensity of Pilates and yoga did not cause the same transmission effects as those of the more intense fitness dance classes,” the authors explain. They go on to caution people to avoid “vigorous exercise in closely confined spaces” during the outbreak, as well as “public gatherings, even in small groups.”
For now, whether it’s truly safe to return to the gym remains questionable at best, but fortunately there’s no dearth of ways to stay healthy while socially distancing, both indoors and out. I’m partial to my colleague Anna Maltby’s aptly named “bare minimum moves for people with no time to exercise.”


Fact-Checking the President, Monkey Vaccines, and the Rise of the ‘Walktail Party’


A handful of stories about the coronavirus we’re reading today


Yasmin Tayag


May 21

* In the middle of the World Health Organization’s annual assembly on Monday, President Donald Trump sent the WHO’s director-general a letter threatening to leave and halt funding to the agency, pending the results of his administration’s investigation of what he called the agency’s “failed response” to Covid-19. The letter details his gripes with the WHO’s response, which NPR fact-checked with experts who said that most of the points he raised are factually incorrect.
* Perhaps the biggest unknown about Covid-19 is whether people who recover from it are immune, and if so, for how long? Encouraging news comes by way of nine macaque monkeys at Harvard University who were deliberately infected with the coronavirus and then, after recovering, were infected a second time — but didn’t get sick. As MIT Technology Review reports, a handful of DNA vaccines tested on the monkeys conferred some protection, too.
* Referencing the 1997 film Gattaca, which depicted a world where your biology determines your place in society, is a recurring trope in science journalism, but it’s perhaps never been as relevant as it is now that we’re seriously talking about immunity passports — certificates issued only to people who have antibodies to Covid-19. “Imagine a world where your ability to get a job, housing, or a loan depends on passing a blood test,” write scientists in an exhaustive critique of the concept in the journal Nature. “This idea has so many flaws that it is hard to know where to begin.”
* It’s technically not legal to drink alcohol on the street in most places in the United States, but as the New York Times reports, it appears that many police officers are looking the other way as people meet outdoors for socially distanced hangouts with a cocktail or beer in hand. These so-called walktail parties, or whiskey walks if that’s your poison, are an increasingly popular option for beating quarantine fatigue, though some experts are worried that we’re imbibing a little too much.




To Open the Country Safely, We Need a Deliberate and Measurable Plan


I worked with 21 health experts and bi-partisan political leaders to develop a strategy for America to #OpenSafely


Andy Slavitt


May 21 · 9 min read





‘How Could the CDC Make That Mistake?’


The government’s disease-fighting agency is conflating viral and antibody tests, compromising a few crucial metrics that governors depend…


The Atlantic


May 21 · 7 min read


How to help your body and immune system recover from Covid-19. It’s estimated that in the United States, over 1.5 million people have contracted the novel coronavirus. So far it appears symptoms can be long-lasting— even for people with mild cases. For people who do recover, the body can feel weak. Check out the story below for some tips from experts about how to heal.

How to Help Your Body and Immune System Recover From Covid-19
It can take a while to feel like yourself again. Here’s how to encourage healing.
elemental.medium.com





I See You but I Don’t: How Masks Alter Human Connection


They can disrupt our ability to communicate and connect. But there are ways to overcome a mask’s necessary downsides.


Markham Heid


May 21 · 5 min read


A guide to a safe road trip. Cars may be the safest way to travel, as long as you’re careful. Even if you have to rent a car, many companies are taking precautions:
In response to concerns about the coronavirus, most rental car companies are taking serious cleaning and disinfecting measures. Hertz recently announced that all cars will receive its “Gold Standard Clean,” an in-depth, CDC-compliant cleaning and disinfecting procedure. National launched a similar initiative with its “Complete Clean Pledge” and Avis also advertises an in-depth cleaning protocol on its site. Before booking a rental car, it’s worth doing some research to verify that the rental company you’re considering is going the extra mile to sanitize vehicles between customers.
Read below for more tips on navigating public bathrooms, food on the road, and where to sleep.

Your Very Detailed Guide to Safe Summer Road Trips
The good news: Cars may be the safest way to go right now — just pack your hand sanitizer
elemental.medium.com





The Pandemic Threatens the Mental Health of Medical Providers


I am worried about all of us…and our families


Dr Jeff Livingston


May 21 · 11 min read





What The Heck Is Going on in Florida?


As the state reopens, concerns about censorship and accuracy of its data arise


Yasmin Tayag


May 20 · 5 min read


What the science says about taking hydroxychloroquine to prevent Covid-19. In a new story for Elemental, writer Dana G. Smith reports on what the latest research says about using hydroxychloroquine as a prophylaxis against the novel coronavirus. She argues that taking the drug before its shown evidence to work or be safe goes against the very principles of the scientific process established in the United States. Read the full story below.

Is There Any Evidence That Hydroxychloroquine Can Prevent Covid-19?
Experts debate whether the potential risks outweigh any hypothetical benefits
elemental.medium.com


How long do Covid-19 symptoms last? No one knows for sure, and many people recovering are home alone without supervision. Survivor groups — and experts who have caught the disease themselves — are reporting symptoms that can last nearly two months.

Guidelines Say Covid-19 Symptoms Last Two Weeks. Survivors Know Better.
People recovering from Covid-19 are searching for answers themselves
elemental.medium.com



Contact Tracing Scams, Faux Meat, and a Scientist Fired in Florida


A roundup of Covid-19 stories we’re reading today


Yasmin Tayag


May 20

* One of the best methods for tracking the spread of the coronavirus is called contact tracing, a labor-intensive process that involves cold-calling people to determine who’s been in contact with a person that has tested positive. While this process is thought to be more effective than app-based methods, a big downside, warns the Federal Trade Commission, is that it’s opened the door to scammers who pose as contact tracers to obtain sensitive personal information.
* The spread of Covid-19 among workers at meat processing plants has led to a worrisome U.S. meat shortage that’s even affected national burger joints like Wendy’s. But there remains a glimmer of hope for your socially distanced barbecue plans this Memorial Day weekend, and it’s greener to boot: The pandemic has cleared the way for alternative meat companies like Impossible Foods and Beyond Meat, reports Wired, and they are stepping up in a big way.
* The first outbreak of Covid-19 is thought to have occurred in a wet market in Wuhan, China, and though the virus’s exact origins have yet to be confirmed (and may never be), the World Health Organization has been pressured to enforce an international ban on wet markets. But as the editors of Nature Food, a scientific journal in the prestigious Nature family of journals, argue in a new editorial, wet markets are a critical source of food and business in many countries. Rather than ban them outright, scientists must be “specific and explicit” about targeting the activities in wet markets that spread zoonotic disease.
* Last week Rebekah Jones, a scientist at Florida’s Department of Health who built the state’s highly praised dashboards for Covid-19 data, emailed public health researchers to announce she had been removed from her project. Yesterday she revealed why: As NPR reports, Jones said in a statement to a local news station that her dismissal came after she refused to “manually change data to drum up support for the plan to reopen.” Florida reopened its doors on Monday, amid warnings from public health experts that it was too early.




Protecting the Most Vulnerable During this Pandemic is Imperative


Why we can’t “just isolate the old people”


Andy Slavitt


May 19 · 3 min read





We Live in a Patchwork Pandemic Now


The coronavirus is hitting different parts of America in different ways, making the crisis harder to predict, control, or understand


Ed Yong


May 20 · 21 min read

Show more

Beware of immunity jealousy. As writer Markham Heid reports for Elemental, improved antibody testing will likely soon show that a lot of people who never experienced serious symptoms have already had Covid-19, and so are likely protected from it—at least for some period of time.
“In either scenario, immunity jealousy is probably going to be a thing,” he says. “And experts say it could make an already difficult situation a lot worse.”
Read more below.

Immunity Jealousy Is Coming
If immunity = freedom, that’s likely to induce envy
elemental.medium.com


About Medium Coronavirus Blog
·
About Medium
·
Terms
·
Privacy
To make Medium work, we log user data. By using Medium, you agree to our Privacy Policy, including cookie

