Turkish scientists and physicians face criminal investigations after criticizing COVID-19 policies
By Kristen McTighe Sep. 16, 2020 , 3:30 PM
In April, Kay?han Pala, a prominent public health expert at Uluda? University in northwestern Turkey, was shocked to find himself the target of a criminal complaint. Pala, a member of the COVID-19 monitoring group of the Turkish Medical Association (TTB), had given an interview to a local website and shared research that showed the number of cases and deaths from the coronavirus were much higher than the government had reported. The complaint, filed by the governor of the province of Bursa, accused him of “misinforming the public” and “causing panic.”

Saying it was his job to speak out about a burgeoning health crisis, Pala called for the charges to be dismissed. Instead, the prosecutor’s office asked administrators at the university to investigate. Only after a monthslong investigation, and national and international condemnation from rights groups and health workers, did the university conclude on 1 September that Pala had acted within his duty.

Related
Coronavirus 2019-nCoV and Virus background with disease cells
Eli Lilly reports first, promising results for an antibody against COVID-19
a man with electrodes on his chest and a doctor monitoring him
As evidence builds that COVID-19 can damage the heart, doctors are racing to understand it
 Sheriff's deputy and on-site nurse give medications to an inmate at Las Colinas Women's Detention Facility. 
Ethical or exploitative—should prisoners participate in COVID-19 vaccine trials?
See all of our coverage of the coronavirus outbreak
“I am a public health scientist and I have to talk about this pandemic locally, nationally, and internationally,” Pala said. “It should not be a crime.”

Yet his case is far from unique. Critics say Turkish authorities are using judicial harassment and administrative investigations to stifle criticism and control information about the crisis. Since March, they have launched investigations against doctors, including leaders of local TTB chapters, after they discussed the government’s health policy and coronavirus information in traditional and social media. “Our colleagues have revealed the scientific facts, nothing beyond that,” says TTB Secretary General Bülent Naz?m Y?lmaz.

A spokesperson for Turkey’s Ministry of Health did not respond to a request for comment.

Turkey, a country of 82 million, has reported almost 300,000 COVID-19 cases so far and just over 7000 deaths. In June, authorities declared their containment strategy a success and lifted a partial lockdown in an effort to boost the country’s ailing economy. But independent doctors and medical associations warned that the reopening was premature.

In early August, TTB claimed their data showed the true number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the country was higher than official figures and accused the government of not being transparent. Turkey’s Ministry of Health has denied the allegations. And although Minister of Health Fahrettin Koca has recently warned that the country is facing an increase in cases and deaths and has implemented extra measures to slow the spread of the virus, medical associations say the government’s effort to stifle information about the pandemic has continued.

Turkey has not regularly released case and death numbers broken down by city, and government figures do not include probable cases, as recommended by the World Health Organization. The authorities have not answered requests to provide data detailing cases by demographic groups, such as among the country’s large refugee population or the working class, despite requests from doctors for that information.

In April, the Ministry of Health sparked outrage when it announced that all COVID-19–related research would need its approval, a step widely seen as intended to block independent scientists and physicians from gaining access to more detailed coronavirus data. “We are asking for more data and more [measures to prevent the spread of the vir
