The participation of infectious disease experts from across the globe in this book addressing a topic unknown just two years ago is witness to the tempo of the 21st Century. This book will be enormously helpful to those who must help to design national policies, and to those contemplating joining the research enterprise on SARS, and the multitude of present and prospective infectious disease threats. If I could think of snappy Greek terms, I’d be talking about some synonyms of travelosis and global-osis as the trajectory we can look forward to in the century opening up before us. In the history of disease, many of its ingredients were anticipated by the AIDS pandemic 20 years earlier. But the long chronicity of HIV infection makes it far less dependent on modern air transport for its dissemination. SARS, for now, takes pride of place with its exploitation of the jetliner as its mode of global dissemination. Prompted by HIV-AIDS, SARS, and a score of other major outbreaks, we have only begun to contemplate the implications of the 21st Century human condition: population crowding often in huge conurbations, typically in close proximity to jet aircraft airports, counting almost 2 million passengers bound for international destinations every day. All this is compounded by intense stratification of material income and health services. What a cauldron!1 If SARS uses high-tech vectors, it has primitive origins in dietary zoonosis, but arguably augmented by urban appetites nourished by 2003-style levels of affluence. Then the quality of public health infrastructure over the surrounding terrain will be all important in determining the level of spread of the new infection. New therapeutic measures are hard to come by, and take years to develop and validate; so it is no surprise that all that was available for SARS was the classic repertoire of case-identification, isolation, and contact tracing and management (e.g. quarantine). Wherever and whenever the political will was consolidated, these were the measures that successfully contained the outbreak of 2002–2003. The response to SARS is beautifully exemplified in the papers in this volume: the extraordinarily rapid and competent identification of the agent of SARS as a novel coronavirus, and the ensuing development of biomolecular technologies for diagnosis and the detective work of tracking the origins and spread of SARS. In this pause we might contemplate the prospects of new emerging infections in general, where they might come from, what if anything we can do to raise our guard. We know virtually nothing of the ultimate evolutionary origins of viruses. Dependent on a host’s metabolism, they are unlikely to be primitive; and likely most viruses are offshoots of host genomes, including their organelles —which in turn may be of symbiotic origin. We then ask, what are the logical possibilities for sources of DNA (read also ‘or RNA’ in all that follows). Viral innovations are more likely to occur as mutations or recombinants or fragmentary additions to existing viruses which have already trodden the tortuous path to adaptation to human, animal, plant or microbial hosts. Where can such DNA be found? Arguably from the hosts themselves, and then by extension also hypothetically from any fragment, plasmid, virus inhabiting those hosts. The cardinal lesson, learned from the practice of biotechnology, is the nearly universal promiscuity of DNA; homologous sequences will pair and recombine no matter what their origin; and more rarely non-homologous segments can also be patched together. What happens in the lab must surely be feasible somewhere in our vast biosphere. 
‘Animal–vegetable–mineral’ 1 Anthroponoses 2 Zoonoses (vertebrate or invertebrate) 3 Phytonoses 4 Bacteria and their viruses, and other unicellulars 5 Synthetic DNA 
1 Anthroponoses 
Confining ourselves for the moment to viruses, the majority of anthroponoses are all too familiar in our history, like smallpox and paediatric viruses. Vaccines are available for almost all of the ancient ones. HIVAIDS has rapidly transformed itself from a primate zoonosis to the most devastating viral disease now on the planet. The hepatitides are just being sorted out. The very recent discovery of metapneumovirus, and most recently, yet another novel human coronavirus (NL-63) is a caution that still further discoveries may be in the offing: we have not reached the end of the catalog. So many pneumonias remain undiagnosed even post mortem, we can hardly be reassured. Blood transfusion and organ transplants must now be added to sexual transmission, close personal contact, and arthropods as vectors, all augmented by 21st Century transport. We are also beset with a handful of nearly benign infections, rhinoviruses and other xii Foreword ‘common colds’. Any of these, or all of the above, have the potential, in principle, of mutating to far more aggressive strains, or of recombining with already virulent strains and augmenting their transmissibility. It is some reassurance that this has not come about (at least to our knowledge) during the past hundred years, more or less, of relevant observation. One of the urgent priorities for the genomic revolution will be the meticulous cataloguing of ‘every’ human virus, and more enlightened insight of the prognosis, based on the dissection of pathogenetic pathways. How clumsy are our purported explanations of the seasonality of respiratory disease. These clumsy explanations show how much we still have to learn.2 
2 Zoonoses 
We should not be surprised that the majority of new outbreaks are of zoonotic origin.3 A myriad of host species harbor a matching number of endogenous zooviruses, that have hardly begun to be indexed. These zooviral infections are often nearly benign in their primary host, with coevolution of host and parasite toward a mutually favorable symbiosis. For most zooviruses, human encounter will have no consequence: either the virus is equally well adapted to the human host; else it may be poorly adapted to the cellular environment of the new human host. These then escape our notice, though some may break through the level of detectability by serosurveys. In a few examples, like monkeypox or H5N1 influenza or hantavirus, we may see sporadic human disease, sometimes quite virulent, but little or no human–human transmission that would ignite a pandemic. The barriers to such transmission are ill-understood: do they reflect disease disproportionate to viral shedding? Host idiosyncrasies: genotype or intercurrent infection or cross-reacting immunity? There is no guarantee that such hypothetical barriers will remain unbreached, with intense selection for mutants that can transcend them, as perhaps occurred in the transition of animal coronaviruses to human SARS. It is anachronistic that one must enter a plea, on behalf of global health, to regulate the consumption of ‘bush-meat’ (whether in its African or Asiatic manifestations) and of the international transport of exotic pets. Our zoos must learn to use the best of veterinary science and art. This is not merely to protect the consumers, but to avert the fallout when exotic diseases spread. 
3 Phytonosis 
No animal viruses of plant origin come to mind, though I am unaware of any concerted effort e.g. to elicit expression of TMV RNA in human cell culture. Pseudomonad bacteria might be expected to elicit opportunistic infection on any substrate. 
4 Bacteria and their viruses, and other unicellulars
 Numerous hints prevail of lateral transfer of bacterial and animal host genes, from genomic studies. There are recurrent claims of expression of bacteriophage and plasmid genes in mammalian cell culture. Recently, the Courvalins4 have demonstrated the delivery of genes by Shigella internalized in epithelial cells. This was intended to be a vector for DNA vaccines, but it is easy to imagine recombination between the bacterial DNA with other viral DNA already entrained in the target cells. Similar prospects might apply to other unicellular parasites (Plasmodium, Leishmania). 5 Synthetic DNA Here we enter the ‘mineral’ world, mainly artefacts of the laboratory. Free DNA has been found to be remarkably potent in entering muscle and other cells, and thereby opened the door to DNA vaccines. This mode of entry bypasses the need for specific receptors, applicable to virus DNA as well: witness the infectivity of synthetic poForeword xiii liovirus.5,6 Free DNA may also occur in abundance with lysis of pus, heavily laden with bacterial flora, witness the market for deoxyribonuclease in symptomatic relief of viscous clogging of airways in cystic fibrosis. This discussion inevitably leads to the odious topic of malicious construction of hyperpathogens and their application to biowarfare, in the hands of terrorists or of organized states. The use of contagious agents is an attack on the whole world’s population, insane for any imaginable political agenda. Were it not for our actual experiences of the last 20 years, from AIDS to SARS, my remarks might be put down as overenthusiastic ravings. There has been one alarm after another, and the beginnings of a concerted international response. The technical cooperation elicited by the SARS episodes, and the monumental contributions of researchers from the PRC, Europe, Canada, the US are encouraging for the prospect of more effective responses, but they still pale before the magnitude of the threats from unforeseeable new emergents. The unique position of the Hong Kong SAR, as the pivotal point of entry and exit, of pathogens and of knowledge about them, has been highlighted. A new flu reassortment, matching the 1918–1919 episode, is on everyone’s mind; but we know our current capability to generate stocks of a new vaccine is totally ‘out of synch’ with the speed of its spread in the modern world. We must renew our cooperative planning with a recognition of the magnitude of the threat, and humility about the paucity of our knowledge of the globe’s viral agents and how they might break out. If we can achieve that, we may retrospectively view the SARS of 2002–2003 as a blessing, that those who perished may not have died in vain. Prof. Joshua Lederberg Raymond and Beverly Sackler Foundation Scholar The Rockefeller University New York
