COVID-19: Morality, Politics, and Fear Jay A. Gupta 
COVID-19 is of course a public health issue, but it has brought to light a set of ethical, political, and indeed psychological tensions that resist tidy resolution. A topic that has gradually become more explicitly discussed, particularly after major state-level decisions had already been made, has been, “Under what conditions should a government close down an entire society?” A kind of morally categorical discourse surfaced in conjunction with increasingly dire warnings from Anthony Fauci and the CDC, reflected in the aptly titled Atlantic article “Cancel Everything.”1 The lack of widely available testing, a fear of overwhelming healthcare resources—tragically modeled by Italy—the corresponding imperative to “flatten the curve,” and the general ineptitude of the Trump administration seemed to confirm the wisdom of marching according to the categorical algorithm of crisis. Here it seemed that the “ought” of lockdown followed directly from the “is” of the contagion. But in any moment of crisis, it is important to be especially wary of the illusion that “values” follow immediately, logically, from any set of facts. 
There is a tradition in moral philosophy associated with Kant called “deontological ethics.” It emphasizes principled, categorical duties to all persons, universal and unconditional moral rightness, and a kind of purity of moral intent that ranks as more important than the consequences of actions. There is a way that this principled theoretical moral philosophy is soaked into everyday cultural attitudes. When we morally recoil at the very idea of killing an innocent person, we are arguably experiencing what I will call a “deontic”2 moment of deep and powerful respect for the sanctity of life and the dignity of persons.
The accent on what we might refer to as the deontic attitude has been so pronounced that as the pandemic and our knowledge of it progressed, particularly throughout March of 2020, one might have been forgiven for thinking that they were witnessing an impressive global consensus among nations that seemed to take something like the absolute sanctity of life and respect for persons seriously as ethical principles. That even in places where healthcare systems were not in any real danger of being overwhelmed, and with the knowledge that the statistical chance of dying from COVID-19 for anyone who is not at least in their 80s and immunocompromised is vanishingly small, massive interruptions in all sectors of civil society were nonetheless deemed necessary in what seemed like a global, ethical “All Lives Matter” moment.

It has become clear, however, that the ethical regard for the sanctity of life and respect for persons has all along been selective. In the United States, anyone who works in “essential services” daily risks exposure to the virus. In some industries such workers are disproportionately black and Hispanic,3 and an open hypocrisy concerning our reliance on undocumented laborers remains the rule.4 Widening the lens, we are also reminded of a hunger pandemic that continues unabated throughout the most devastated regions of the world, which will only be exacerbated by the economic ripple effects of mass lockdowns on the working poor, ultimately resulting in malnutrition, famine, and death.5 
It is arguably the case, then, that the “pan” in “pandemic,” and hence the universal deontic moment, more particularly refers to a situation of acute fear where the chronic threat of death is suddenly, uncharacteristically experienced by us, those who normally feel well insulated from such threats through participation in the routines and imperatives of a functioning civil society, which have now been jarringly interrupted. And there is likely more to say, even studied, about what seems to be a deontic recoil in the face of acute crises: how near or far a threat is felt will have implications for the ostensible “universalism” of the response to it by politicians, administrators, and the people they believe they must answer to. 
In the United States, we seem to have observed a series of cascading institutional pressures, from the NBA to school closures, with subsequent action by most cities and states, to impose a kind of universal, indiscriminate policy of public hygiene. This has amounted to a deontic political performance, where administrators and politicians could take the moral high ground, backed up by the “hard data.” They took their cues from a group of epistemic authorities—epidemiologists, virologists, and other medical experts—whose advice appeared to issue forth from rationality itself, a cluster of public health imperatives that could only be challenged at the risk of sounding uninformed, conspiratorial, or simply stupid. Indeed, one ran the risk of being morally and intellectually shamed as a “covidiot.” As someone advised me in March, “it’s math.” Right, rational, universal action seemed to follow directly from a set of authoritative epistemic imperatives insensitive to place or context. Idaho is Italy, Montana is New York City. 
One recalls Hegel’s fundamental complaint against Kant: that purity of moral principle must run afoul of the complexity of practice. Given the devastating effects to the normal functioning of a massively complex civil society, the strangely blunt, one-size-fits-all approach to public policy naturally invited scrutiny. David Katz, the author of a widely discussed New York Times op-ed, excited considerable controversy for suggesting that the fight against the coronavirus might be worse than the disease itself.6 In making his argument, he pointed to confirmed data indicating that 99 percent of known cases were considered mild, and those who died were overwhelmingly older, with significant chronic illnesses. The widely accepted “ought” of containing the entire population did not clearly follow from the “is” of the data. Katz suggested a more targeted approach, one that “could focus our resources on testing and protecting, in every way possible, all those people the data indicate are especially vulnerable to severe infection: the elderly, people with chronic diseases and the immunologically compromised.”7 This in combination with social distancing measures could slow the spread of the virus without causing massive, indefinitely prolonged disruptions to civil society.
This appears to have been Sweden’s approach all along, which has invited strong, morally tinged criticism from its European neighbors. Sweden’s sin seems to have been that its strategy involved a move away from, as Katz puts it, “trying to protect all people to focusing on the most vulnerable.”8 It is indeed hard not to see an old antagonism between utilitarian and deontological moral sensibilities playing out here, an antagonism between those who look to “maximize happiness,” even if it means sacrificing a few for the good of the many, and those who equate morality with an absolute regard for each and every individual life. For anyone who points to Sweden’s relative success in avoiding lockdown with 22 deaths per 100,000 as compared to Ireland, which undertook a lockdown and has the same death rate, someone else will point to the number of lives saved in Denmark at 7 deaths per 100,000 as a moral rebuke to Sweden.9 One with utilitarian sensibilities looks at this difference and is not impressed. One with deontological moral sensibilities (at risk of caricature) is, if not horrified, concerned. However, the latter attitude, traditionally associated with moral purity, has arguably been driven by the “heteronomous” element of fear, involving a kind of self-protective mechanism that oftentimes interprets itself in terms of community responsibility. The situation changes by the day, but at the time of this writing, individual states are one by one abandoning the lockdown model. In the absence of a cure or a vaccine, our attitudes and practices will necessarily tilt utilitarian, for the immediate alternative will be more or less constant disruptions to civil society. And any genuine commitment to community responsibility must reckon with both local and global effects of pandemic policy on civil society in a way that any morally pure stance must of necessity fail to do. As the acute fear of the “pan” threat of death subsides and is replaced by a clearer sense of who is dying, and how many, both individuals and institutions will, perhaps without advertising the fact, engage more and more in the utilitarian calculus. And that will involve some notion of acceptable risk, not just to “essential workers,” but to us all. 
To the deontic mindset, this shift may appear morally repugnant, because any such calculus will involve compromise. On this score, moral purity can turn puritanical. Julia Marcus draws an analogy between the all-or-nothing attitude in the pandemic and the early days of the HIV epidemic, which was then known as the “gay plague.”10 The austere, morally tinged health advice for gay men was abstinence, which would involve the total elimination of risk. This was gradually replaced with a program of risk reduction. Marcus notes on this score that public health campaigns that promote the total elimination of risk not only prove unsustainable, as in the case of abstinence-only sex education, but are actually associated with worse health outcomes. The upshot is that “without a nuanced approach to risk, abstinence-only messaging can inadvertently stigmatize anything less than 100 percent risk reduction.”11
Such considerations bear directly on the matter at hand. Marcus too notes the phenomenon of “pandemic shaming” the “covidiot” who is perceived to trespass against the present public health regime. The moralism is palpable. Exhibit A is the image of heedless partyers on beaches, which points to the existence of hedonic desires overtaking the rational deontic imperative to shelter in place. But it is a misleading image that merely obscures the rational desire of people to participate in a fully functioning civil society: to have daily, diverse commerce with others and to pursue worthwhile projects and goals. 
It is worth noting that some sense of acceptable risk is universally built into our normalized routines. We get into our cars knowing that injury and death are possible (perhaps not with direct knowledge of how possible: 1.25 million people are killed each year throughout the globe).12 And some element of acceptable risk is built into all engineering decisions where the aim is cost-effective manufacturing. In both cases, we should note that whatever counts as an acceptable risk tends to emerge in the course of one or another normalized practice. It is unnerving that under panic-inducing crisis conditions this pragmatic mode of cost-benefit analysis that is built into our everyday routines and practices dissolved overnight. This is partly explained by the fact that very few people, particularly administrators and politicians, want to appear to be callous utilitarians during a crisis, one that triggers our deepest existential anxieties, and so they are motivated to err in the opposite direction to avoid any scenario where they might have to.13 The more explicit the questions of life and death, the more dramatic the deontic recoil. 
Following up on an earlier point, we should note that the notion of acceptable risk has not entirely disappeared during the crisis. It remains embedded in practices that are deemed indispensable for civil society to keep running. Thus, without much if any discussion, it has been deemed an acceptable risk for healthcare workers, grocers, public transportation personnel, and all workers in “essential service” sectors to expose themselves to the virus to a greater degree than those who otherwise have been ordered to shelter in place. 
The question is not whether acceptable risk will return as a factor in the ongoing question of how to “reopen” society, but how explicit it will be in public discourse and decision-making. One possible scenario is that it will simply make an inconspicuous return under the omnipresent pragmatic pressure to keep civil society running. However, to follow up on Marcus’s point, in the absence of any coherently articulated public policy that decisively departs from the “abstinence only” model of sheltering in place, we can expect increasingly risky behaviors to be driven underground without any corresponding benefits to the reinvigoration of civil society. Our deontic selves insist that any life lost is unacceptable, but as I have argued here, this “self” has seemed to surface in a highly circumstantial way, under conditions of panic, and in rather hypocritical form in its selective universalism. Our pragmatic selves, the selves always already immersed in complex networks of institutions, practices, and relationships, presuppose that some loss of life is what keeps the system up and running. The question is whose lives are lost, and how many? When the question is explicitly posed in a situation of perceived mortal crisis and universal fear, it can sound morally indecent. But the question has in fact been implicitly asked and answered throughout the crisis, and must necessarily become more explicit. The alternative is more or less constant disruptions to civil society with far-reaching, destructive consequences for all its members.

[Footnotes]
1. Yascha Mounk, “Cancel Everything,” Atlantic, March 10, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/coronavirus-cancel-everything/607675/. 
2. In a transgression of convention, I will use “deontic” and “deontological” interchangeably.
3. Adam Serwer, “The Coronavirus Was an Emergency until Trump Found Out Who Was Dying,” Atlantic, May 8, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/05/ americas-racial-contract-showing/611389/. 
4. Alfredo Corchado, “A Former Farmworker on American Hypocrisy,” New York Times, May 6, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/06/opinion/sunday/coronavirusessential-workers.html. 
5. “WFP Chief Warns of Hunger Pandemic as COVID-19 Spreads (Statement to UN Security Council),” transcript of remarks by David Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme, April 21, 2020, https://www.wfp.org/news/wfpchief-warns-hunger-pandemic-covid-19-spreads-statement-un-security-council. Thanks to David Gilbert for drawing my attention to this.
6. David Katz, “Is Our Fight against Coronavirus Worse than the Disease?” New York Times, March 20, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/20/opinion/coronaviruspandemic-social-distancing.html. 
7. Ibid. 
8. Ibid. 
9. Thomas Erdbrink and Christina Anderson, “‘Life Has to Go on’: How Sweden Has Faced the Virus without a Lockdown,” New York Times, April 28, 2020, https://www. nytimes.com/2020/04/28/world/europe/sweden-coronavirus-herd-immunity.html; Emma Reynolds, “Sweden Says Its Coronavirus Approach Has Worked. The Numbers Suggest a Different Story,” CNN, April 28, 2020, https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/28/europe/swedencoronavirus-lockdown-strategy-intl/index.html. Thanks to Bryant Hill for the latter source. 
10. Julia Marcus, “Quarantine Fatigue Is Real,” Atlantic, May 11, 2020, https://www. theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/05/quarantine-fatigue-real-and-shaming-people-wonthelp/611482/. 
11. Ibid.
12. “50+ Car Accident Statistics in the U.S. and Worldwide,” The Wandering RV website, October 17, 2019, https://www.thewanderingrv.com/car-accident-statistics/. 
13. The mesmerizing model for tragic, force majeure utilitarian decision-making was the widely reported triage situation in Italian hospitals where COVID-19 patients had to be ranked according to who would receive life-prolonging treatment and who wouldn’t.
