Bleach baths and drinking hand sanitiser: poison centre cases rise under Covid-19
Household cleaning items and prescription medicines behind many poisonings
* Coronavirus – latest updates
* See all our coronavirus coverage
Laura Spinney
Mon 8 Jun 2020 10.02 BSTLast modified on Mon 8 Jun 2020 10.29 BST
* 
* 
* 
Shares
56


 ‘The patients turned completely red’: household cleaning products are the cause of many poisonings during lockdown. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
The official US advice has been to disinfect high-touch surfaces to minimise the spread of Covid-19.
Taking that advice to the extreme, Lisa filled a sink with a mixture of 10% bleach solution, vinegar and hot water and soaked her vegetables and other food in it.
Soon, she noticed a powerful odour of chlorine in the kitchen and was having difficulty breathing.
Lisa (not her real name) was discharged from hospital within a few hours of arriving there earlier this year. The outcome was more tragic for an Arizona couple who swallowed fish tank cleaner containing chloroquine phosphate in March after hearing Donald Trump recommend the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine for its anti-Covid-19 effects.
Though the two molecules are related, the former is not approved for use in humans. The couple was hospitalised; the man died, the woman was in a critical condition for a while.



FacebookTwitterPinterest
 The drug hydroxychloroquine has been promoted by Donald Trump as a Covid-19 treatment. Photograph: George Frey/Reuters
Poison centres have had their day-to-day experience turned upside down by the pandemic, just like medical centres of every other kind, but the impact has varied across countries.  
In the US, says Julie Weber, the president of the American Association of Poison Control Centers, there has been a clear increase in cases.
Calls relating to cleaning materials and disinfectants were up 20% and 16% respectively during the first three months of 2020, compared to the same period last year. And that was before the president suggested in April his dangerous and medically unfounded advice that injecting disinfectant might be a solution to being infected with coronavirus.
 Donald Trump's prescription for coronavirus: quite literally toxic
Marina Hyde

 
Read more
Elsewhere, the volume of cases has remained constant or even fallen. Enquiries to the UK’s National Poisons Information Service were down by 13% in March and April over last year, and mainland Europe has seen a similar pattern.
Bruno Mégarbane, a former president of the European Association of Poisons Centres and Clinical Toxicologists, says this may be due to confinement, which has removed people from many sources of intoxication.
Exposure to others has increased, however, and the profile of cases has changed everywhere. “It’s an important principle in toxicology: poisonings increase with the availability of the products concerned,” he says.
Household items are among the main culprits.
In Bordeaux, France, the toxicologist Magali Labadie reports a rise in cases of people rubbing bleach into their bodies – “the patients turned completely red!” – washing their hands in methylated spirits, causing irritation of the skin, or drenching their homes so thoroughly in bleach that it has provoked asthma attacks.
Advertisement
Cases of children accidentally poisoning themselves by drinking hand sanitiser are up, as the two have coincided in the same restricted space for prolonged periods. And despite the World Health Organization’s reminder that pets don’t spread Covid-19, vets have seen an increase in the number of cases of cats brought in in an alcoholic coma, after being washed in hand sanitiser, and dogs with burns on their skin and paws after being washed in bleach or other corrosive substances at the end of a walk.
Some cases have involved substances that are harder to obtain, such as the diabetes drug metformin, after the possibility was raised that it might have a therapeutic effect against Covid-19.
In one case, a woman swallowed hair dye containing a molecule called paraphenylenediamine that can cause a severe allergic reaction and burn the body’s soft tissues.
Her goal appeared to be internal disinfection. Cases of poisoning by ingestion of essential oils, with the same goal, have increased in places too.



FacebookTwitterPinterest
 A cleaning crew wipes down a podium where Donald Trump was due to speak in the White House. Photograph: Alex Brandon/AP
Advertisement
Poison centres have worked hard on their messaging, especially where the need has arisen to correct misinformation put out by persons in authority, but it hasn’t always worked.
The toxicologist Peter Chai, of the Brigham and Women’s hospital in Boston, says his centre has seen a spike in cases of hydroxychloroquine poisoning. Though the drug is considered safe in healthy people at recommended doses, some people have exceeded those doses and provoked serious side effects – including dangerous disturbances of their heart rhythm.

Covid-19: why is hand washing so effective? – Science Weekly Podcast
After public health authorities briefly advised that ibruprofen should be avoided during the pandemic – before retracting that advice – some people who routinely take the drug for chronic health conditions accidentally poisoned themselves with alternative painkillers such as paracetamol, or worsened their condition by taking nothing at all.
Data is still being gathered for scientific analysis, but anecdotal reports suggest that suicide attempts involving poisoning dropped during confinement and are now increasing again.
“Paradoxically it’s my impression that deconfinement has been more of a source of stress and anxiety,” says Mégarbane.
Davide Lonati, of the Poison Control Centre at the IRCCS Maugeri Foundation, a hospital in Pavia, Italy, agrees. As Italy comes out of confinement, he is bracing for a wave of a different kind. “Intoxication with antidepressants and anti-psychotic drugs has increased, since cases of Covid-19 started going down,” he says. “Could it be due to post-traumatic stress disorder, grief? Who knows? We start to feel free, to feel normal, but it’s a strange normal.”

