
ADVISINGTHENATION
Informing the New Administration: Ending the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Path to Recovery
Feature Story | January 22, 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to rage across the United States and in other parts of the world.  Scientists have worked at record speed to develop new vaccines, and the nation is now embarking on an unprecedented effort to scale up vaccine manufacturing, production, allocation, and distribution.

At the same time, actually vaccinating enough Americans to achieve community immunity, as well as providing test kits and therapeutics, is posing daunting national and global manufacturing, supply chain, and distribution challenges.   As the pandemic persists, the Biden administration — along with state and local decision-makers — must make difficult choices about how to balance public health priorities with other critical societal functions.

Since the early stages of the pandemic the National Academies have mobilized expertise across disciplines to help the nation and the world respond and recover. 

Science, engineering, and medicine are foundational to finding solutions to this crisis, and since the early stages of the pandemic the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine have mobilized expertise across disciplines to help the nation and the world respond and recover. 

“The COVID-19 pandemic is the worst public health, economic, and societal crisis of our lifetimes,” said National Academy of Sciences President Marcia McNutt. “When this global emergency hit, our entire institution quickly pivoted to deliver the types actionable science decision-makers need in times of crisis. Our work is aimed not only at solving the immediate, day-to-day challenges posed by the pandemic but also toward eventually rebuilding a more robust, resilient nation and world.”   

Related Stories:
>> Climate Change
>> Racial Equity
>> Economic Recovery
“Our work is aimed not only at solving the immediate, day-to-day challenges posed by the pandemic but also toward eventually rebuilding a more robust, resilient nation and world.” 


“As early as late January last year, we began advising the U.S. government on the outbreak of novel coronavirus, and soon came to the realization that it had the potential to cause a massive pandemic,” said National Academy of Medicine President Victor Dzau. “As a result, we began to quickly mobilize expertise so that we could provide rapid responses on critical issues related to COVID-19 that were informed by the best available science.”

A Direction for Allocating Vaccines Equitably and Reopening Society
In the first months of 2021, much of the new administration’s focus will be on effective and equitable distribution of vaccines, especially initially when doses are limited.  To help national, state, and local decision-makers with these difficult decisions, a recent report from the National Academies outlines a four-phased framework to vaccine allocation that is guided by evidence on how to reduce deaths, prioritize vulnerable populations, and maximize societal benefit.
Informed by the report, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued guidance on the initial phases of vaccine allocation.  In addition, the report is helping guide many states as they develop their allocation plans. 

As vaccines become more widely available, their acceptance and use will depend upon whether the public trusts their safety and utility. To address safety concerns, the CDC and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration are in discussions with the National Academies to set up an expert committee to be on call to independently examine data about potential adverse effects from vaccines and rapidly determine whether they are statistically significant. 

To inform its upcoming guidance on how to effectively communicate with the public about vaccines, the National Academies’ Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN) — which enlists expert knowledge in the behavioral and social sciences to advise on pandemic-related issues — recently held a virtual information gathering session to examine the current state of public trust in vaccines and reasons for hesitancy, with a special emphasis on how to build trust in underserved and vulnerable communities. In addition, the Academies are launching a communications initiative to help Americans make informed decisions about vaccines, which will draw upon the institution’s extensive body of work on vaccine safety. 

Vaccines are an essential tool for ending the pandemic, but for at least the next several months, other public health measures will still be needed to help stop the spread of COVID-19, and policy decisions must be made about how to reopen society and protect health and safety. 

For instance, a top goal of the Biden administration is to help states and localities safely reopen K-12 schools for in-person instruction. Last July, the National Academies issued a report to provide advice on reopening schools, which recommends that grades K-5 and students with special needs be the first priority for in-person instruction.  The report calls for federal and state governments to direct significant resources to districts and schools to help them cover the cost of COVID-19 precautions, including masks, facility upgrades, and reconfigured classrooms.


As many states and localities continue to struggle with obtaining adequate supplies of equipment for health care workers and other essential employees, Congress has requested advice from the Academies on how the nation can be better prepared to ensure the continuity of critical medical devices and drugs. In addition, the Academies’ Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases and 21st Century Health Threats — established last March — has been providing rapid, actionable guidance on key questions throughout the pandemic.  Most recently, the committee partnered with SEAN to issue guidance on COVID-19 testing strategies for colleges and universities based on lessons learned from the fall 2020 semester.

Toward a Strong and Sustained Recovery
While the nation’s focus is on stopping the spread of COVID-19 and ending the pandemic, the Biden administration must also start now to take actions toward a strong and sustained recovery.

“Every crisis also brings new opportunities,” said National Academy of Engineering President John L. Anderson. “As we build back from this pandemic, we need to apply lessons learned to strengthen fundamental research and development in bio/pharma, improve supply-chain management, coordinate the efforts of private and public sectors for rapid scale-up of manufacturing vaccines and therapeutics, and develop rapid and accurate diagnostics for quick response to the next pandemic.”

Crises such as the pandemic lead to cascading impacts on the economy, personal income, supply chains, and other aspects of modern society that must be addressed. To that end, the National Academies have launched a new strategic science initiative to provide rapid, scenario-based analyses aimed at protecting critical societal functions, avoiding worst outcomes, and leveraging opportunities.


For its pilot case, the Response and Resilient Recovery Strategic Science Initiative is examining how the pandemic could affect rental property evictions for low- and middle-income households and identifying potential chains of consequences — such as increased spread of COVID-19 or added strain on already over-extended community resources. The initiative will identify actions to prevent worst-case consequences and steer the nation toward a more robust recovery.

“Our strategic science initiative adds to our portfolio of activities that provide actionable guidance to decision-makers when they need it most, said Gregory Symmes, chief program officer at the National Academies.  In this way, we can help end this pandemic and lay the foundation for a smoother, stronger recovery.”

Fostering International Engagement
The new administration has noted the need for international cooperation to solve the COVID-19 pandemic and to better prepare for future global threats to public health. On his first day in office, President Biden signed an executive order halting the United States' departure from the World Health Organization. The National Academies recognized early on that that international collaboration in science, engineering, and medicine is essential to ending this global health emergency.

For example, National Academy of Medicine President Victor Dzau, a member of the Global Preparedness Monitoring Board and a principal of the global Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, has been active in advancing global efforts to solve the pandemic and improve global preparedness for future health emergencies.


“The new U.S. administration presents new opportunities for the nation to renew its leadership and collaboration in global public health efforts,” Dzau said. “Leading and engaging with the rest of the world to develop and execute a shared strategy is the only way to end this global disaster and prevent future crises.”

“Leading and engaging with the rest of the world to develop and execute a shared strategy is the only way to end this global disaster and prevent future crises.”


“This pandemic will not be eliminated in the U.S. until it is crushed all over the world,” Dzau added. “We are fortunate to be part of a strong global network of Academies, research institutions, and multilateral organizations that actively collaborates and regularly shares expertise and ideas, and we look forward to continuing to contribute to global response and recovery efforts.”

This article is by Molly Galvin. For more information on the projects, reports, and activities discussed, visit our COVID-19 Resources collection.

Informing the New Administration

This article is part of a series on how the work of the National Academies can contribute to the Biden administration’s top priorities — the COVID-19 pandemic, economic recovery, racial equity, and climate change.

All Related Features:

COVID-19

Climate Change

Racial Equity

Economic Recovery

LEARN MORE
Topics of Interest
imageText
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)

imageText
Resources on Economic Recovery

imageText
Climate Resources at the National Academies

imageText
Our Work on Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion

All Recent News
imageText
Anthony S. Fauci to Receive Public Welfare Medal

imageText
Vital Directions for Health and Health Care

imageText
Pandemic Response and Recovery

imageText
Economic Recovery for All Americans

LOAD MORE...
NAS Logo
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
NAE Logo
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING
NAM Logo
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF MEDICINE
About Us
Our Work
Events
Contact Us
Opportunities
Publications
Visit
Current Operating Status
E-Newsletters
Connect With Us

DONATE TODAY
Privacy StatementDMCA PolicyTerms of UseSite Map
Copyright © 2021 National Academy of Sciences. All Rights Reserved.
