Skip to main content

SEARCH
DONATE
Get help
Coronavirus
Hire a wheelchair
Borrow a commode
Support at home
Help with loneliness
Find missing family
Help for refugees
Help for young refugees
Help with money problems
Prepare for emergencies
Help for victims of terrorism abroad
Get involved
Donate
Volunteer
Fundraising and events
Partner with us
Coronavirus
Teaching resources
Jobs
First aid
Learn first aid skills
Baby and child first aid
Do a first aid course
Find a first aid venue
Buy a first aid kit
About us
What we do
How we're run
What we stand for
News
Our history
Contact us
Shop
Find a charity shop
Donate goods
Volunteer in our shops
Furniture and electrics
Independent living products
Books
Wedding dresses
Vintage and designer clothes
Gift shop
Visit our eBay shop
Our ASOS vintage shop
Stories
Health and social care
Migration and displacement
Disasters and emergencies
Our Movement
 
Get help 
Get help during the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak 
Coronavirus support line
CALL OUR CORONAVIRUS SUPPORT LINE: 0808 506 6455
The British Red Cross is here to help you through the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.

If you are finding it hard to cope and need to talk, we are just a phone call away.

Call our coronavirus support line for help
Speak to a friendly volunteer today
If you’re at home and finding it hard to access food or medication, or you are feeling lonely or worried, call our coronavirus support line today. 

Our friendly volunteers answering calls on the helpline can give you emotional or practical support, or direct you to other people or local services. And if you just want to talk, we are here to listen.

Call our coronavirus support line:

0808 506 6455
 
Open 10am – 6pm every day.

Free and confidential.*

What is the British Red Cross coronavirus support line? 
The support line was set up to provide support to communities and people in need during the coronavirus pandemic. 

We give people without a support network someone to talk to, and can help them access things they may need like food, medicine and emotional support.

 

Who will you speak to if you call the coronavirus support line?
Our support line is run by our experienced 'psychosocial and mental health' volunteers at the British Red Cross. 

You will speak to a human (no bots here!) like former nurse Chris, who has been volunteering with us for 35 years.

What support can the coronavirus support line provide? 

Chris and the rest of our team of friendly volunteers will be more than happy to provide practical and emotional support, lend a listening ear and give you the contact details of local organisations offering all kinds of help.

Whether for yourself or if you are calling on behalf of someone you know, you can get confidential help with:

 

Mental health: coping with self-isolation and loneliness, and a listening ear if you need it.

Access to food or medication: collecting prescriptions if you can’t get to the doctors and arranging food deliveries at home.

Guidance and advice: we can give you details of where to turn for financial help with rent, bills, benefits and homelessness.


Who is the coronavirus support line for?
The support line is for anyone who is lonely or worried or finding it difficult to access food and medication. 

We want to reach people who may not be receiving help from anywhere else, and who are at risk of further health and well-being issues as a result of isolation. 

This includes people who may be shielding but have no family or support system nearby and can’t get online for help. 

 

How do you contact the coronavirus support line? 
The number to call is 0808 506 6455

 

Does it cost anything to call the coronavirus support line?
No, calling our support line is completely free.


What are the hours of operation for the coronavirus support line? 

You can call us every day between 10am – 6pm. 

If you call outside our opening hours, please leave us a message with your contact details. We will get back to you in the morning.


Who can I contact outside the hours of the coronavirus support line?  

If you need someone to talk to someone urgently outside of our opening hours, the Samaritans are open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

Call the Samaritans for free on 116 123
or write them an email.

If you are worried you or someone you know may be at risk of coronavirus, please use the online NHS 111 coronavirus service. 


How else can you get support during the coronavirus pandemic?

From borrowing a wheelchair to having essentials delivered at home, you can find ways online to get help without calling the support line.

You can find advice about how to keep safe, and if you’re feeling anxious, how to take a calmer approach to your wellbeing.

If you feel lonely, we have information and support that may help and a range of learning activities to help you cope.  

We have practical tips on how to keep your children happy during isolation, too.


How else are the British Red Cross helping during the coronavirus pandemic?

Read how we are helping people in the UK and around the world.

See how people in need can give help or get help or find more
information.

Find out how lockdown hasn’t stopped our service teams.

Discover how our emergency appeal is helping to protect the world’s most vulnerable communities.

Visit our press centre to find the latest on our coronavirus work.

*Your call may be recorded for quality and training purposes. 

More information
Chris, one of our support line workers taking calls
Meet Chris, a friendly volunteer answering your calls.
Chris has been a British Red Cross volunteer for 35 years. She is one of our amazing operators on our support line.

Find out more about the people answering your calls.
A father kneels next to his young daughter as she lies on a sofa and holds his hand to her head to check if she has a fever.
Coronavirus emergency
If you or someone you know may be at risk of coronavirus, please call  111.

If you think you might have coronavirus, contact NHS 111.
Is this page useful?
YESNO
CONTACT US
JOBS
SITEMAP
CYMRAEG
LOGIN
Terms and conditions
Privacy
Cookies
Modern slavery statement
Accessibility
©2020 British Red Cross
The British Red Cross Society, incorporated by Royal Charter 1908, is a charity registered in England and Wales (220949), Scotland (SC037738) and Isle of Man (0752).

Registered with Fundraising Regulator

https://www.redcross.org.uk/get-help/coronavirus/support-line?c_code=170460&c_source=google&c_name=&adg=&c_creative=coronavirus%20helpline&c_medium=cpc&gclid=Cj0KCQjwk8b7BRCaARIsAARRTL5Fd1fVYcKAQQM4LzqMgfRNNXTrjmLqVdR-6JRFSnCkboWbPLLE2uoaAiBOEALw_wcB## Accessed 28th September 2020
