Ask for an antigen test to check if you have coronavirus now
Anyone who has symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) can ask for a free test to check if they have the virus. This is called an antigen test.

There is another type of test (antibody test) that checks if you've already had the virus. This test is not widely available yet. You can find out about antibody testing on GOV.UK.

Information:
If you need medical advice about your symptoms:

England: NHS 111 online coronavirus service
Scotland: NHS inform
Wales: NHS Direct Wales
Northern Ireland: get advice from a GP or GP out-of-hours service
Who can ask for a test
You can ask for a test:

for yourself, if you have coronavirus symptoms now (a high temperature, a new, continuous cough, or a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste)
for someone you live with, if they have coronavirus symptoms
You can get 1 test for each person with symptoms.

This service is for people in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

In England and Wales, you can ask for a test for a child who lives with you, whatever their age. In Scotland and Northern Ireland, you can only get a test for your child if they are aged 5 or over.

If you're asking for a test for someone else, and the person is aged 13 or over, check they're happy for you to ask for a test for them.

What the test involves
The test usually involves taking a swab of the inside of your nose and the back of your throat, using a long cotton bud.

You can do the swab yourself (if you are aged 12 or over) or someone can do it for you. Children aged 11 or under cannot do the swab themselves. Their parent or guardian will have to swab test them.

There are 2 ways of getting a test. You can:

book an appointment at a drive-through or walk-through test site
ask for a home test kit – this will be delivered to your home
If you get a home test kit, you will need to do the test and return the kit in the next 48 hours. You will be told how to do this.

When to ask for a test
You need to get the test done in the first 5 days of having symptoms.

Do not wait
Ask for the test as soon as you have symptoms.

Explains what kind of test you can order on different days – up to day 6 of symptoms
Days since symptoms started	What you can order
Days 1 to 4	Book a drive-through or walk-through test at a test site or order a home test kit.

Order the kit by 3pm on day 4 to make sure you can do the test in the first 5 days.
Day 5	Book a test at a test site. It's too late to order a home test kit.
Day 6 onwards	It's too late for an antigen test.
How do I ask for a test?
You can ask for a test online.

We'll ask you:

how you want to get the test – at a drive-through or walk-through test site or by ordering a home test kit
for details such as your name, mobile phone number and address
Ask for a coronavirus test
This service is for everyone.

Some people can get priority tests on GOV.UK. Go to GOV.UK if you:

are an essential worker, including NHS or social care staff
are asking for tests for the residents and staff of your care home
have a verification code from your employer?
Information:
Help with asking for a test
If you're having problems getting a test, see answers to common questions about asking for a coronavirus test.

More in Testing and tracing for coronavirus
Ask for an antigen test to check if you have coronavirus now
Your coronavirus test result
NHS Test and Trace: if you're contacted after testing positive for coronavirus
NHS Test and Trace: if you've been in contact with a person who has coronavirus
Page last reviewed: 17 June 2020
Next review due: 24 June 2020
