1. The U.S. is heading into a make-or-break holiday week.

The country passed 12 million cases, adding one million new cases in the past week alone. New daily cases are approaching 200,000: On Friday, the country recorded more than 198,500, a record.

At least 255,000 Americans have died of the coronavirus, and hospitalizations rose beyond 82,000. Above, a memorial in Miami for virus victims.

Public health officials are urging Americans to avoid travel for Thanksgiving and to celebrate only with members of their immediate households.

If you are gathering with others for the holiday, a negative test doesn’t mean you should skip other measures, like quarantining, wearing masks and social distancing.

For many Americans, including the woman known as “Thanksgiving Grandma,” this will be the first Thanksgiving without a loved one at the table. Wanda Dench became internet famous when a misdirected text landed a stranger at her holiday table. Ms. Dench’s husband died from the coronavirus in April.


Chandan Khanna/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
2. A pharmaceutical giant and an upstart biotech firm are the front-runners in the race to create a vaccine. They were up against more than the virus.

At play were not just commercial rivalries and scientific challenges between Pfizer and Moderna, but an ambitious plan to put the federal government in the middle of the effort, and President Trump’s bet that a vaccine would secure his re-election.

This is how they did it in record time.

Pfizer’s vaccine is now being reviewed by the Food and Drug Administration for emergency use and Moderna’s may not be far behind. The first Americans could get a vaccine by the middle of December.

Separately, the F.D.A. granted emergency authorization for the Regeneron antibody treatment given to Mr. Trump after he was diagnosed with Covid-19.


5. Fighting the pandemic and its global economic impact dominated the Group of 20 summit, which began on Saturday and continues today.

Heads of state of the world’s richest countries and the European Union spoke about the battle against the coronavirus and potential debt relief for poor countries hit hard by the pandemic.

President Trump briefly participated in the summit from the White House, but skipped the event on pandemic preparedness and instead headed to his Virginia country club for a round of golf.

The virus reduced the annual summit to a giant webinar, transforming an event that was supposed to allow Saudi Arabia to play host to the world’s great powers and depriving Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, the country’s de facto ruler, of reviving his international reputation.


6. Do these people look real?

They may look familiar, but they don’t exist. We built an A.I. system to create fake faces like the ones used to fool people on Facebook, Amazon and even Tinder.

The technology that makes them is improving at a startling pace thanks to a new type of artificial intelligence called a generative adversarial network. In essence, you feed a computer program a bunch of photos of real people. It studies them and tries to comes up with its own photos, while another part of the system tries to detect which of them are fake.

But just like humans, the programs can be deeply flawed. See for yourself.


Daryl Marshke/University of Michigan
Michael Dwyer/Associated Press
8. Thanksgiving: Ready, set, don’t go (but do cook).

With coronavirus cases raging across the U.S., the safest choice this Thanksgiving is to spend it with the people you live with. Here are ideas from across The Times for how to keep it small, safe and fun:

Digitally reimagine the holiday, from meal prep to after-dinner activities.
Food shopping just got more complicated. We asked the experts for advice.
If you do gather, stay small, take it outdoors or open the windows, mask up and wash your hands. Here are some precautions to take.
Melissa Clark shows you how to make Thanksgiving with one pot and one pan, for a small-scale feast that packs in the classics. For more cooking ideas, here are great recipes that only require five ingredients and 17 recipes for a small dinner.
In this year like no other, we want to know what makes you grateful. Tell us in six words.


Ksenia Kuleshova for The New York Times
9. Music to get us through.

At the fearful height of the pandemic in April, Simon Gronowski, an 89-year-old Holocaust survivor, began playing jazz tunes on his piano from his apartment window in Brussels, bringing relief to his besieged neighbors throughout the lockdown that lasted into late May.

“Music is a means of communication, of connection,” said Mr. Gronowski, who taught himself how to play the piano as a teenager after escaping the Nazis. Piano was a way for him to connect with his sister who had died in Auschwitz.

Throughout the summer and into the fall, live jazz has become a near-constant presence across New York City. The makeshift outdoor shows have been therapeutic for musicians and fans alike.



