As SARS-CoV-2 Virus Evolves, Genomic Data Should Be Collected Alongside Patient and Public Health Data, Says New Report
Media Advisory | July 31, 2020
To better understand the evolution, transmission patterns, and disease progression of SARS-CoV-2 — the virus that causes COVID-19 — genome sequence data should be integrated with patient clinical data and epidemiological data, says a new report from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) should ensure the generation of demographically representative, high-quality full genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 across the United States, and develop and invest in a national data infrastructure that allows for ongoing genomic surveillance, the report recommends.

Genomic Epidemiology Data Infrastructure Needs for SARS-CoV-2: Modernizing Pandemic Response Strategies presents a framework to define and describe the data needs for a system to track and correlate viral genome sequences with clinical and epidemiological data. It also outlines the types of questions such a framework could answer, and examines the regulatory and governance considerations.

The collection of genomic data has important implications for vaccine development and monitoring, as protein mutation could affect vaccine safety and efficacy, the report says. Once a vaccine is available, these data can also determine whether new cases are due to local spread or to virus importation from elsewhere.

When genomic, clinical, and epidemiological data analyses are integrated, they can provide a more nuanced, real-time picture of an outbreak than any of the data types considered in isolation. For example, “super-spreading” events (such as sporting events or religious services) are of particular epidemiological importance. These events can be identified with viral sequence data from multiple individuals involved in an outbreak linked to the specific activity. In addition, linking virus sequence data with clinical data on patient demographics, hospitalization, coinfections, and other factors would facilitate identification of strains and mutations associated with changes in disease severity; response to certain medical interventions, such as convalescent plasma; and specific complications, such as neurologic or gastrointestinal effects.

DETAILS: Genomic Epidemiology Data Infrastructure Needs for SARS-CoV-2: Modernizing Pandemic Response Strategies is available for immediate release. Media inquiries should be directed to the National Academies’ Office of News and Public Information; tel. 202-334-2138 or e-mail news@nas.edu.
