
 Report 13: Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries 
Seth Flaxman*, Swapnil Mishra*, Axel Gandy*, H Juliette T Unwin, Helen Coupland, Thomas A Mellan, Harrison Zhu, Tresnia Berah, Jeffrey W Eaton, Pablo N P Guzman, Nora Schmit, Lucia Cilloni, Kylie E C Ainslie, Marc Baguelin, Isobel Blake, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Olivia Boyd, Lorenzo Cattarino, Constanze Ciavarella, Laura Cooper, Zulma Cucunubá, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Amy Dighe, Bimandra Djaafara, Ilaria Dorigatti, Sabine van Elsland, Rich FitzJohn, Han Fu, Katy Gaythorpe, Lily Geidelberg, Nicholas Grassly, Will Green, Timothy Hallett, Arran Hamlet, Wes Hinsley, Ben Jeffrey, David Jorgensen, Edward Knock, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani, Pierre Nouvellet, Kris Parag, Igor Siveroni, Hayley Thompson, Robert Verity, Erik Volz, Caroline Walters, Haowei Wang, Yuanrong Wang, Oliver Watson, Peter Winskill, Xiaoyue Xi, Charles Whittaker, Patrick GT Walker, Azra Ghani, Christl A. Donnelly, Steven Riley, Lucy C Okell, Michaela A C Vollmer, Neil M. Ferguson1 and Samir Bhatt*1 
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Modelling MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis Abdul Latif Jameel Institute for Disease and Emergency Analytics, Imperial College London Department of Statistics, University of Oxford 
*Contributed equally 1Correspondence: neil.ferguson@imperial.ac.uk, s.bhatt@imperial.ac.uk 
Summary 
Following the emergence of a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) and its spread outside of China, Europe is now experiencing large epidemics. In response, many European countries have implemented unprecedented non-pharmaceutical interventions including case isolation, the closure of schools and universities, banning of mass gatherings and/or public events, and most recently, widescale social distancing including local and national lockdowns. 
In this report, we use a semi-mechanistic Bayesian hierarchical model to attempt to infer the impact of these interventions across 11 European countries. Our methods assume that changes in the reproductive number – a measure of transmission - are an immediate response to these interventions being implemented rather than broader gradual changes in behaviour. Our model estimates these changes by calculating backwards from the deaths observed over time to estimate transmission that occurred several weeks prior, allowing for the time lag between infection and death. 
One of the key assumptions of the model is that each intervention has the same effect on the reproduction number across countries and over time. This allows us to leverage a greater amount of data across Europe to estimate these effects. It also means that our results are driven strongly by the data from countries with more advanced epidemics, and earlier interventions, such as Italy and Spain. We find that the slowing growth in daily reported deaths in Italy is consistent with a significant impact of interventions implemented several weeks earlier. In Italy, we estimate that the effective reproduction number, Rt, dropped to close to 1 around the time of lockdown (11th March), although with a high level of uncertainty. 
Overall, we estimate that countries have managed to reduce their reproduction number. Our estimates have wide credible intervals and contain 1 for countries that have implemented all interventions considered in our analysis. This means that the reproduction number may be above or below this value. With current interventions remaining in place to at least the end of March, we estimate that interventions across all 11 countries will have averted 59,000 deaths up to 31 March [95% credible interval 21,000-120,000]. Many more deaths will be averted through ensuring that interventions remain in place until transmission drops to low levels. We estimate that, across all 11 countries between 7 and 43 million individuals have been infected with SARS-CoV-2 up to 28th March, 30 March 2020 Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731 Page 2 of 35 

representing between 1.88% and 11.43% of the population. The proportion of the population infected to date – the attack rate - is estimated to be highest in Spain followed by Italy and lowest in Germany and Norway, reflecting the relative stages of the epidemics. 
Given the lag of 2-3 weeks between when transmission changes occur and when their impact can be observed in trends in mortality, for most of the countries considered here it remains too early to be certain that recent interventions have been effective. If interventions in countries at earlier stages of their epidemic, such as Germany or the UK, are more or less effective than they were in the countries with advanced epidemics, on which our estimates are largely based, or if interventions have improved or worsened over time, then our estimates of the reproduction number and deaths averted would change accordingly. It is therefore critical that the current interventions remain in place and trends in cases and deaths are closely monitored in the coming days and weeks to provide reassurance that transmission of SARS-Cov-2 is slowing. 
SUGGESTED CITATION 
Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy et al. Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries. Imperial College London (30-03-2020) doi: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731. 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. 30 March 2020 Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731 Page 3 of 35 

1 Introduction 
Following the emergence of a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and its global spread, large epidemics of the disease, caused by the virus designated COVID-19, have emerged in Europe. In response to the rising numbers of cases and deaths, and to maintain the capacity of health systems to treat as many severe cases as possible, European countries, like those in other continents, have implemented or are in the process of implementing measures to control their epidemics. These large-scale non-pharmaceutical interventions vary between countries but include social distancing (such as banning large gatherings and advising individuals not to socialize outside their households), border closures, school closures, measures to isolate symptomatic individuals and their contacts, and large-scale lockdowns of populations with all but essential internal travel banned. Understanding firstly, whether these interventions are having the desired impact of controlling the epidemic and secondly, which interventions are necessary to maintain control, is critical given their large economic and social costs. 
The key aim of these interventions is to reduce the effective reproduction number, ????, of the infection, a fundamental epidemiological quantity representing the average number of infections, at time t, per infected case over the course of their infection. If ???? is maintained at less than 1, the incidence of new infections decreases, ultimately resulting in control of the epidemic. If ???? is greater than 1, then infections will increase (dependent on how much greater than 1 the reproduction number is) until the epidemic peaks and eventually declines due to acquisition of herd immunity. 
In China, strict movement restrictions and other measures including case isolation and quarantine began to be introduced from 23rd January, which achieved a downward trend in the number of confirmed new cases during February, resulting in zero new confirmed indigenous cases in Wuhan by March 19th. Studies have estimated how ???? changed during this time in different areas of China from around 2-4 during the uncontrolled epidemic down to below 1, with an estimated 7-9 fold decrease in the number of daily contacts per person.1,2 Control measures such as social distancing, intensive testing, and contact tracing in other countries such as Singapore and South Korea have successfully reduced case incidence in recent weeks, although there is a risk the virus will spread again once control measures are relaxed.3,4 
The epidemic began slightly later in Europe, from January or later in different regions.5 Countries have implemented different combinations of control measures and the level of adherence to government recommendations on social distancing is likely to vary between countries, in part due to different levels of enforcement. 
Estimating reproduction numbers for SARS-CoV-2 presents challenges due to the high proportion of infections not detected by health systems1,6,7 and regular changes in testing policies, resulting in different proportions of infections being detected over time and between countries. Most countries so far only have the capacity to test a small proportion of suspected cases and tests are reserved for severely ill patients or for high-risk groups (e.g. contacts of cases). Looking at case data, therefore, gives a systematically biased view of trends. 
An alternative way to estimate the course of the epidemic is to back-calculate infections from observed deaths. Reported deaths are likely to be more reliable, although the early focus of most surveillance systems on cases with reported travel histories to China may mean that some early deaths will have been missed. Whilst the recent trends in deaths will therefore be informative, there is a time lag in observing the effect of interventions on deaths since there is a 2-3-week period between infection, onset of symptoms and outcome. 30 March 2020 Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731 Page 4 of 35 

In this report, we fit a novel Bayesian mechanistic model of the infection cycle to observed deaths in 11 European countries, inferring plausible upper and lower bounds (Bayesian credible intervals) of the total populations infected (attack rates), case detection probabilities, and the reproduction number over time (Rt). We fit the model jointly to COVID-19 data from all these countries to assess whether there is evidence that interventions have so far been successful at reducing Rt below 1, with the strong assumption that particular interventions are achieving a similar impact in different countries and that the efficacy of those interventions remains constant over time. The model is informed more strongly by countries with larger numbers of deaths and which implemented interventions earlier, therefore estimates of recent Rt in countries with more recent interventions are contingent on similar intervention impacts. Data in the coming weeks will enable estimation of country-specific Rt with greater precision. 
Model and data details are presented in the appendix, validation and sensitivity are also presented in the appendix, and general limitations presented below in the conclusions. 
2 Results 
The timing of interventions should be taken in the context of when an individual country’s epidemic started to grow along with the speed with which control measures were implemented. Italy was the first to begin intervention measures, and other countries followed soon afterwards (Figure 1). Most interventions began around 12th-14th March. We analyzed data on deaths up to 28th March, giving a 2-3-week window over which to estimate the effect of interventions. Currently, most countries in our study have implemented all major non-pharmaceutical interventions. 
For each country, we model the number of infections, the number of deaths, and ????, the effective reproduction number over time, with ???? changing only when an intervention is introduced (Figure 2-12). ???? is the average number of secondary infections per infected individual, assuming that the interventions that are in place at time t stay in place throughout their entire infectious period. Every country has its own individual starting reproduction number ???? before interventions take place. Specific interventions are assumed to have the same relative impact on ???? in each country when they were introduced there and are informed by mortality data across all countries. 30 March 2020 Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731 Page 5 of 35 

Figure 1: Intervention timings for the 11 European countries included in the analysis. For further details see Appendix 8.6. 
2.1 Estimated true numbers of infections and current attack rates 
In all countries, we estimate there are orders of magnitude fewer infections detected (Figure 2) than true infections, mostly likely due to mild and asymptomatic infections as well as limited testing capacity. In Italy, our results suggest that, cumulatively, 5.9 [1.9-15.2] million people have been infected as of March 28th, giving an attack rate of 9.8% [3.2%-25%] of the population (Table 1). Spain has recently seen a large increase in the number of deaths, and given its smaller population, our model estimates that a higher proportion of the population, 15.0% (7.0 [1.8-19] million people) have been infected to date. Germany is estimated to have one of the lowest attack rates at 0.7% with 600,000 [240,000-1,500,000] people infected. 30 March 2020 Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731 Page 6 of 35 

Table 1: Posterior model estimates of percentage of total population infected as of 28th March 2020. Country % of total population infected (mean [95% credible interval]) Austria 1.1% [0.36%-3.1%] Belgium 3.7% [1.3%-9.7%] Denmark 1.1% [0.40%-3.1%] France 3.0% [1.1%-7.4%] Germany 0.72% [0.28%-1.8%] Italy 9.8% [3.2%-26%] Norway 0.41% [0.09%-1.2%] Spain 15% [3.7%-41%] Sweden 3.1% [0.85%-8.4%] Switzerland 3.2% [1.3%-7.6%] United Kingdom 2.7% [1.2%-5.4%] 
