
 1 

 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
Office of Inspector General 
Hospital Experiences Responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic: Results of a National Pulse Survey March 23–27, 2020 
Christi A. Grimm 
Principal Deputy Inspector General 
April 2020, OEI-06-20-00300 Full report: oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-06-20-00300.asp 

Hospital Experiences Responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic: Results of a National Pulse Survey March 23–27, 2020 
Purpose of the Review 
This review provides the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and other decision-makers (e.g., State and local officials and other Federal agencies) with a national snapshot of hospitals’ challenges and needs in responding to the coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. This is not a review of HHS response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We have collected this information as an aid for HHS as it continues to lead efforts to address the public health emergency and support hospitals and other first responders. In addition, hospitals may find the information about each other’s strategies useful in their efforts to mitigate the challenges they are facing. 
The hospital input that we describe reflects their experiences and perspectives at a point in time—March 23–27, 2020. The pandemic is fast-moving, as are the efforts to address it. We recognize that HHS, Congress, and other government entities across the Federal, State, local, and Tribal levels are taking substantial actions on a continual basis to support hospitals in responding to COVID-19. HHS has already taken and continues to take actions related to each of the challenges that hospitals identified in our survey, and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act provides the basis for additional actions. We present this information for HHS’s and other decision-makers’ consideration as they continue to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Key Takeaway 
Hospitals reported that their most significant challenges centered on testing and caring for patients with known or suspected COVID-19 and keeping staff safe. Hospitals also reported substantial challenges maintaining or expanding their facilities’ capacity to treat patients with COVID-19. Hospitals described specific challenges, mitigation strategies, and needs for assistance related to personal protective equipment (PPE), testing, staffing, supplies and durable equipment; maintaining or expanding facility capacity; and financial concerns. 
How OIG Did This Review 
This information is based on brief telephone interviews (“pulse surveys”) conducted March 23–27, 2020, with hospital administrators from 323 hospitals across 46 States, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, that were part of our random sample. Our rate of contact was 85 percent. Interviews focused on three key questions: 
1. What are your most difficult challenges in responding to COVID-19? 
2. What strategies is your hospital using to address or mitigate these challenges? 
3. How could government best support hospitals responding to COVID-19? 

Respondent hospitals included Special Pathogen Centers, critical access hospitals, and a range of hospitals nation-wide of various sizes and characteristics. At the time of our surveys, most hospitals reported they were treating patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19, but some were not currently treating any patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19. (See Methodology on pages 18–20 for additional information.) Full report: oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/oei-06-20-00300.asp 

Findings at a Glance: Hospital Challenges Severe Shortages of Testing Supplies and Extended Waits for Results Hospitals reported that severe shortages of testing supplies and extended waits for test results limited hospitals’ ability to monitor the health of patients and staff. Hospitals reported that they were unable to keep up with COVID-19 testing demands because they lacked complete kits and/or the individual components and supplies needed to complete tests. Additionally, hospitals reported frequently waiting 7 days or longer for test results. When patient stays were extended while awaiting test results, this strained bed availability, personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies, and staffing. Widespread Shortages of PPE Hospitals reported that widespread shortages of PPE put staff and patients at risk. Hospitals reported that heavier use of PPE than normal was contributing to the shortage and that the lack of a robust supply chain was delaying or preventing them from restocking PPE needed to protect staff. Hospitals also expressed uncertainty about availability of PPE from Federal and State sources and noted sharp increases in prices for PPE from some vendors. Difficulty Maintaining Adequate Staffing and Supporting Staff Hospitals reported that they were not always able to maintain adequate staffing levels or offer staff adequate support. Hospitals reported a shortage of specialized providers needed to meet the anticipated patient surge and raised concerns that staff exposure to the virus may exacerbate staffing shortages and overwork. Hospital administrators also expressed concern that fear and uncertainty were taking an emotional toll on staff, both professionally and personally. Difficulty Maintaining and Expanding Hospital Capacity to Treat Patients Capacity concerns emerged as hospitals anticipated being overwhelmed if they experienced a surge of patients, who may require special beds and rooms to treat and contain infection. Many hospitals reported that post-acute-care facilities were requiring negative COVID-19 tests before accepting patients discharged from hospitals, meaning that some patients who no longer required acute care were taking up valuable bed space while waiting to be discharged. Shortages of Critical Supplies, Materials, and Logistic Support Hospitals reported that shortages of critical supplies, materials, and logistic support that accompany more beds affected hospitals’ ability to care for patients. Hospitals reported needing items that support a patient room, such as intravenous therapy (IV) poles, medical gas, linens, toilet paper, and food. Others reported shortages of no-touch infrared thermometers, disinfectants, and cleaning supplies. Isolated and smaller hospitals faced special challenges maintaining the supplies they needed and restocking quickly when they ran out of supplies. Hospitals reported that their most significant challenges centered on testing and caring for patients with COVID-19 and keeping staff safe Hospitals across the country reported facing similar challenges, regardless of which stage of the process they were in—treating patients with coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), testing patients who were potentially infected, or preparing to treat COVID-19 patients in the near future. The most commonly reported challenges centered on hospitals’ efforts to confirm cases of COVID-19, to keep health care staff safe, and to provide needed services to patients requiring hospital care for a wide array of medical reasons, including COVID-19. Challenges included difficulties related to testing, lack of personal protective equipment (PPE), and staffing, including specialized staffing. Hospitals reported that severe shortages of testing supplies and extended waits for test results limited hospitals’ ability to monitor the health of patients and staff Hospitals explained that they were unable to keep up with testing demands because they lacked complete kits and/or the individual components and supplies needed to complete tests, such as nasal swabs, viral transfer media, and reagents used to detect the virus. These shortages left hospitals unable to effectively test staff, patients, and others in the community who reported that they were concerned about possible exposure. One hospital administrator said that across the industry, “millions [of tests] are needed, and we only have hundreds." Without access to needed testing materials, some hospitals described dividing the media in COVID-19 kits in half to double their capacity and resorting to using the transfer media in flu and strep kits to provide testing. Hospitals described extended waits for COVID-19 test results. Hospitals reported frequently waiting 7 days or longer for test results. According to one hospital, 24 hours would typically be considered a long turnaround time for virus testing. Hospitals’ reliance on external laboratories contributed to delays, particularly as these laboratories became overwhelmed with tests to process from around the State or country. Hospitals also reported delays related to infrequent specimen pickups, mailing delays, and labs’ restrictive business hours. Some hospitals described success getting results more quickly by using commercial labs, whereas others received more timely results from public sources. Still others experienced inconsistent turnaround times, leaving them unable to predict when results would arrive or advise patients on how long they should self-quarantine or undertake other measures while awaiting results. Testing challenges exacerbated other challenges, including bed availability, PPE supplies, and staffing shortages. Hospitals reported that to prevent the spread of the virus in the hospital and community, they were treating symptomatic patients as presumptive positive cases of COVID-19 (i.e., an individual with symptoms that strongly indicate COVID-19 and tests have ruled out similar conditions, but without a positive COVID-19 test result). The scarcity of COVID-19 tests and length of time it took to get test results back meant presumptive positive patients greatly strained bed availability, PPE supplies, and staffing, as noted in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 1: Hospitals reported that the lack of testing supplies and delays in receiving test results caused additional challenges. Hospitals reported that some presumptive positive patients remained in the hospital for days while awaiting test results, which reduced the hospitals’ availability of beds for other patients. One hospital that was holding presumptive positive patients in intensive care unit beds reported that testing with a quick turnaround would free up bed availability and increase patient and staff safety. An administrator at another hospital noted that the sooner the hospital knows whether patients are negative, the faster it can move them to a lower level of care that consumes fewer resources. As one administrator put it, "sitting with 60 patients with presumed positives in our hospital isn't healthy for anybody." Hospitals reported that extended patient stays while awaiting COVID-19 test results also depleted PPE supplies used by staff in treating those patients during those additional days. One hospital reported that its staff, at the time of our interview, used (on average) 307 masks per day for its 23 patients with suspected cases of COVID-19. Another hospital administrator said, "The testing turnaround presents a challenge, especially for our ‘rule-out’ patients…we have to use a lot of PPE on those rule-outs. And especially when it’s a negative, we basically used all that PPE for nothing." The inability to quickly identify confirmed cases exacerbated challenges with hospital staffing. In one hospital, between 20-25 percent of staff were determined to be presumptively positive for COVID-19. Due to the lack of quick test results, staff who ultimately were not positive were prevented from providing clinical services for longer than necessary, causing a substantial strain on staffing availability. Another hospital noted that it wanted to set up a separate testing clinic to keep potentially infectious patients from exposing staff, but it did not have enough testing kits and/or related components and supplies to set up such a clinic. Delays in receiving test results also made it more challenging for hospital staff to provide patients with the most appropriate care. One hospital reported that these delays put patients at risk because physicians were unable to make effective treatment decisions without the test results. Another said that some patients faced unnecessarily long hospital stays because some long-term-care facilities and nursing homes will not accept patients without a confirmed negative COVID-19 test. Testing challenges hampered hospitals’ efforts to reduce community spread, protect staff, and care for patients. Hospitals reported that their inability to test patients quickly was affecting their efforts to limit the transmission of COVID-19 within the wider community. Given supply Hospital Experiences Responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic: Results of a National Pulse Survey March 23-27, 2020 OEI-06-20-00300 3 shortages and uncertainty about future access, hospitals reported prioritizing testing for their employees and for patients with more severe symptoms. Prioritized testing meant that many hospitals reported they were currently unable to conduct widespread testing of patients and community members to help contain the spread of COVID-19. Hospitals raised concerns that widespread shortages of PPE put staff and patients at risk Hospitals across the country reported that a shortage of PPE was threatening their ability to keep staff safe while they worked to treat patients with COVID-19. The most commonly needed PPE items reported were masks (including N95 masks, surgical masks, and face shields), followed by gowns and gloves. Hospitals reported that heavier than normal use of PPE contributed to shortages. The administrator of one hospital stated that before COVID-19, the hospital’s medical center used around 200 masks per day and that it was now using 2,000 per day. Delays in test results led to heavier use of PPE until a patient’s status was confirmed. Another hospital administrator noted the “fear factor” associated with COVID-19, which led to all staff wearing masks instead of only a subset. One hospital administrator reported that some supply distributors limited the quantity of supplies that any one hospital could order, which meant that even with no COVID-19 patients, the hospital was depleting PPE faster than it could restock. Even among hospitals that reported that they currently had enough PPE, some noted that a surge in patients would quickly deplete their supplies. One hospital noted that with its high “burn” rate (i.e., rate of use), its inventory of PPE would last only 3 more days. Another hospital administrator expressed a common concern: not wanting to put employees in a position that “endangers their lives and the lives of their families because [they] do not have PPE.” Hospitals pointed to the lack of a robust supply chain as delaying or preventing them from restocking the PPE needed to protect staff. Hospitals reported that the supply chain for medical equipment had been disrupted because of increased demand for PPE from health care providers and others around the country. As one administrator said, everyone is “trying to pull [PPE] from the same small bucket.” Another administrator stated that their hospital’s purchaser was reporting delays of 3-6 months in being able to replenish key supplies, including surgical and N95 masks. Another hospital made the point that this competition for supply was unusual in that it involved not only health care providers, but also the public. An administrator at this hospital reported apprehending a person trying to steal face masks from the hospital lobby. Hospital administrators expressed uncertainty about availability of PPE from Federal and State sources. Some hospitals noted that at the time of our interview they had not received supplies from the Strategic National Stockpile, or that the supplies that they had received were not sufficient in quantity or quality. One administrator stated that getting supplies from the stockpile was a major challenge, saying that the supplies the hospital received “won't even last a day. We need gloves, we need masks with fluid shields on—N95 masks—and we need gowns. It's the number one challenge all across the system." One health system reported that it received 1,000 masks from the Federal and State governments, but it had been expecting a larger resupply. Further, 500 of the masks were for children and therefore unusable for the health system’s adult staff. One hospital reported receiving a shipment
